4. The minister's speech was by spontaneous rounds of applause. 5. We could hear occasional of gunfire from behind the enemy lines, symptoms of stress ever since he took on that new job. ELS 75 It has generally been assumed that he settled there because of all that snow for his reindeer and sleigh, but the real reason he put his roots down on the edge of the Arctic Circle in Finnish Lapland, Europe's last wilderness, must surely be that he simply loved the beauty and solitude of this last Utopia, Santa Claus Land. The capital is the winter-sport center of Rovaniemi. It's a modern town in the middle of nowhere. Concorde used to land there and many daily Finnair flights arrive from all over Finland. a) person who is believed, by children, to deliver presents at Christmas b) vehicle used for travelling on snow, often pulled by horses c) settle establish oneself (in a place) (phrase) d) state of being without other people - usually calm and peaceful e) imaginary place which is perfect and where everyone is happy f) put between two other things with little space left over squashed g) a long way from anywhere isolated (phrase) 76 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Finnish Lapland A) has a modern airport in the capital, Rovaniemi B) is smaller than Norwegian Lapland C) is the only remaining wilderness in Europe D) gets most of its revenue from winter sports E) is entirely covered with snowy mountains 2. Finnish Lapland is an area A) B) completely within the Arctic Circle C) also known as Utopia D) with a large reindeer population E) close to the North Pole 3. The writer claims that A) Santa Claus settled in Finnish Lapland because of the peace and quiet B) it's because of its location that Finnish Lapland is so popular C) the greatest attraction in Finnish Lapland is the Northern Lights D) trying to find wilderness is like trying to find Utopia E) reindeers are the best animals for pulling sleighs 1. After travelling extensively throughout the world, she finally in a small village near the sea. 2. One of the most popular tourist attractions was the rides round the frozen lake. 3. I know the house is beautiful, but it's 4. When I got onto the crowded train, I found myself There isn't even a local shop. between a woman carrying a screaming baby and an extremely fat man who snored while he slept. 5. Whenever the pressure of work got too much for him, he used to escape from the city and seek the of the mountains. ELS 77 It depends on the gorilla - and on the situation. In some instances, the flamboyant and intimidating gesture may be just what it seems a warning to keep away. When truly aroused, the leader of the gorilla troop rises and drums his chest rapidly, palms open and slightly cupped. Then he explodes into a charge which may or may not be a bluff. Scientists who have been charged at by gorillas report that the animals almost always stop short of violence - unless the human intruder responds in a hostile manner. Sometimes chest-beating is only an expression of relief after the danger has passed, a means of keeping in touch with other gorillas in the troop, or a way of warning other troops away from the feeding area. Some gorillas, especially the young ones, often beat their chests as expressions of high spirits. One thing the gorilla does not do is stage a victory celebration by drumming furiously on his chest after he has just cracked an opponent's spine. That sort of thing happens only in the movies. of the hand f) move suddenly and energetically g) deception attempt to make somebody wrongly believe that you will do something h) person or thing that enters a place where he or it is not wanted i) cheerfulness (phrase) j) backbone 78 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. One function of a gorilla's chest-beating is A) to frighten younger gorillas with overly high spirits B) the celebration of a recent victory C) to call the other troop members to the feeding area D) to establish which gorilla is the leader of a troop E) communication with the other members of the troop 2. According to the passage A) scientists have found shorter gorillas to be more violent B) only the leader of the troop of gorillas beats his chest C) gorillas beat their chests for various reasons D) a gorilla's charge never needs to be taken seriously E) gorillas are easily trained to appear in films 3. After a fight with his opponent, the gorilla A) does not act triumphantly B) beats his chest as an expression of relief C) breaks the opponent's backbone D) drums his chest furiously E) behaves exactly as portrayed in films 1. The students were all in 2. His manner with the staff is so as it was the last day of the semester. that most of them are too scared to speak to him. 3. His hands were around his mouth as he called to his friends on the other side of the field. 4. and, thus, enable her to walk properly. 5. We knew as soon as the burglar alarms went off that there was a/an in the building. ELS 79 L0VE Ilk For most of us, love is the most absorbing subject in existence. There is an enormous range of meanings in this one little word motherly love and self-love, fatherly love and children's love fc their parents there is brotherly love and there is the love of one's home and one's country there is love of money and there is love of power. Love clearly includes all of these, but the love in which one can be oneself is the pre-eminent love for most of us. Love at its fullest can include an enormous range of emotions and sentiments. It can combine humility with pride, passion with peace, selfassertion with self-surrender it can reconcile violence of feeling with tenderness. Being in love is love at its most intense, and is personally focused in a very special way. Our common speech reflects this fact, as we talk of falling in love as if it were something into which we are precipitated against our will, like falling into a pond. cause to happen suddenly and unexpectedly j) small area of water, often man-made 80 ELS 1 Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Love, according to the passage, A) makes us experience all emotions more intensely B) enables the balancing of extreme feelings C) happens against our will D) is only real when we are in love E) is sometimes really difficult to achieve 2. It is stated in the passage that A) we frequently mention love in our speech B) there are various kinds of love C) nobody wants to fall in love D) it requires effort to maintain any kind of love E) everyone is more interested in love than in anything else 3. The writer states that, generally, the most important kind of love A) absorbs us more than anything in existence B) occurs when we feel that we are in love C) is fallen into and happens against our will D) is the one which allows us to behave as we are E) can only be possessed by emotional people 1. Today's lecture will be given by the man who is in this particular field of science. 2. Attempts are being made to the management and the workers and bring an end to the strike. 3. That book was so 4. The things he just said reflect my 5 that I could hardly put it down for a minute. on the matter entirely. is all very well, but you won't get the job if you don't talk about your achievements. Everyone knows the answer they both weigh the same. An interesting point, however, is what sort of image popped into your head when you read those words. One person who answered this question saw, distinctly, a pair of scales with a cube of lead on one scale balancing a big mound of feathers on the other. A second person got no mental image, but simply conceived of the problem in terms of words. People differ greatly in their power to make pictures in their heads. Years ago the British scientist Sir Francis Galton asked a group of colleagues to try to visualize the breakfast table as they had sat down to eat that morning. Some of them saw the table in sharp detail and in colour. Others saw it only in black and white. Still others saw a blurred outline, as if through a badly adjusted magic lantern. Many could get no visual image at all. Scientists believe that most people are born with the ability to summon up in the mind's eye precise visual images of past experiences, but that many of us lose this power as we grow up, simply because we fail to exercise it. pile heap g) imagine form an idea in the mind h) clear distinct i) unclear indistinct confused in appearance j) old-fashioned device for projecting pictures onto a screen k) gather together bring into existence (phrase) I) in imagination in memory (phrase) 82 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. We can infer that Sir Francis Galton's aim was A) to measure people's ability to picture past experiences B) to discover what his colleagues had eaten for breakfast C) to find out how much attention his colleagues paid to their domestic surroundings D) to assess the incidence of colour-blindness E) to provide practice in making pictures in one's head 2. The writer states that A) most people cannot visually recall events as recent as that morning B) some people are completely unable to guess at the weight of something C) past experiences become less important to us as we grow up D) there is no difference between feathers and lead E) not all people have the same ability to visualize things 3. People's ability to recall past experiences visually A) depends on how far in the past they were B) often diminishes with the passing years C) eventually decreases despite exercise D) enables us to keep precise pictures of them E) varies according to the words used to describe them 1. Before you leave, just in and say goodbye. 2. I was so tired that I had to all my strength just to climb the stairs to bed. 3. The camera lens must have had a fingerprint on it, because all our photos are 4. I hope the pillows aren't filled with 5 as I'm allergic to them. people see their holiday destinations as far more beautiful than they actually are. She lay hovering between life and death, in the twilight of half-surrender, when she overheard two of her co-workers talking just outside her hospital room. If we could only reach her. one of them said passionately. If we could only make her understand how much we need her. The words did reach her, and with the forces of life and death hanging in the balance, they resurrected her will to live. In that moment of discouragement and wavering faith, the intensity of her colleague's plea reassured her and gave her courage to take up the struggle again. If we truly wish to live, if we have something to live for, then the will to live becomes a powerful force in combatting illness. Within each of us there are two strong instinctual drives, the will to live and the desire to destroy ourselves. The powerful instinct to remain alive is bolstered by our desire to create, to discover and to accomplish. Doctors make obeisance to it when, in a crisis of illness, they say, We have done all we can - now it is up to the patient. be between two possibilities {phrase) g) cause to exist again or be used again h) determination strong desire i) not firm or confident j) intense, emotional request k) calm remove worries I) fight to stop something happening m) natural not based on thought or teaching n) encourage support o) respect 84 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. We can infer that when the patient heard her colleagues talking A) it was during the early evening B) she had virtually given up trying to stay alive C) she realized that she had a fatal illness D) they were not allowed to go into her hospital room E) she had difficulty understanding them 2. The old lady A) lost her faith after her illness B) was the most important member of the work team C) was unable to receive visitors when she was ill D) had been left to die by her doctors E) worked in new fields of study in education 3. The writer concludes that in fighting illness, it is important to A) have friends and colleagues around you B) be able to rely on your doctor C) have a purpose in life D) hear others speaking E) have a lot of courage 1. When a person tries to commit suicide, it is often more of a for help than an actual attempt to take one's own life. 2. We have been trying to them on the phone for the last hour, but there's been no answer. 3. No matter how much you her, she still thinks everything will go wrong. 4. There's no point in trying to that old plan. It didn't work before, and it won't work now. 5. She herself to various charities, for which she raises money tirelessly. ELS 85 How many people can the earth hold. Will birth and death rates continue to 1 decline. Can food production keep pace with population growth. Can technology I supplement or replace today's resources. What are the long-term effects of pollution 1 on health, climate, and farm production. Debate over such issues has spawned I many volumes, as scholars look to the future with varying degrees of optimism and 1 gloom. Today's problems - which face Third World 1 megacities in particular - cannot be ignored by developed countries. We cannot look I to the past for solutions as there is no precedent for such growth. We are in 1 uncharted, challenging waters. cause to happen or be created produce in great numbers a book, published articles, etc h) person with great knowledge, usually of a particular subject i) belief or feeling that the future will be good j) feeling of unhappiness or being without hope k) way of thinking about something part of something's nature I) get faster speed up or cause to speed up m) relying on each other n) similar happening or occurrence that existed previously o) unfamiliar situations (idiom) p) requiring effort and determination in order to succeed 86 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The points put forward in the lecture The Terror of Change A) have changed scholars from a sense of optimism to one of gloom B) are, for the most part, accepted C) had not been considered by scholars previously D) caused much debate and disagreement E) filled several volumes 2. According to the writer, having no equivalents in the past A) analyses formulated by experts are open to discussion B) books on the world's problems cause a great deal of debate C) Third World megacities are not sufficiently aided D) modern technological developments do not meet the needs of the people E) today's problems require new solutions 3. The outlook for the world's future A) arouses optimism in some experts, yet pessimism in others B) is a repetition of events which occurred in the past C) depends entirely on technological advances made today D) is one of overpopulation, pollution, and reduced farm production E) shows that the population will soon exceed the earth's capacity 1. If you when you cycle down this hill, you should build up enough speed to get up the next hill without too much effort. 2. Although we've looked at this problem in almost every one of its we have yet to discuss the question of finance. 3. His second of poetry will come out towards the end of the month. 4. There's no point in just giving them easy exercises all the time. They need something more if they are to make any progress. 5. You could take vitamin tablets to your diet, but increasing your intake of fruit and vegetables would probably be better in the long run. ELS 87 A neighbor of mine recently wrote to two contractors for bids on a concrete driveway. Here's the beginning of one reply Dear Mr I am offering you a special price because I am having a slack season now. I have some debts to pay and this work will be a big help to me. The second began Dear Mr 1 can give you a good solid driveway with a six-inch bed of cinders and three inches of concrete. Properly graded and drained, this should last you 20 years without cracking. The second man got the job. Why. Because he told my neighbor what he wanted to know, not how much good the job would do the contractor. He followed the first principle of good letter-writing, one I've hammered at in my classes for years think of your reader's problems, not of your own. k) damage, leaving lines or splits on the surface I) repeat forcefully say again and again to have an effect 88 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. A letter, according to the writer, A) is a better way of making contact than a phone call B) should be relevant to the reader's situation C) is the best way to ask a girl out D) must have correct spelling E) should always begin with Dear 2. From the statement the writer makes in the passage, we can conclude that A) the writer's neighbor is a builder B) most people are only interested in themselves C) the writer prefers writing to making direct contact D) the writer is a teacher E) it takes years to perfect the art of letter-writing 3. The main point of the passage is A) how a good letter can affect the result B) the best way to get driveway work done professionally C) that it's essential to compare costs when you want work done D) the importance of good spelling in a letter E) never to accept the first offer you receive 1. I this cup while I was doing the washing-up, but I think it's still usable. 2. We can't award the contract for building the new factory to anyone until all the have come in. 3. In the centre of the room, there was a huge antique table made of 4. She oak. the point into her children's heads that they were never, under any circumstances, to go anywhere with a stranger. 5. How did someone like him, with so little experience, manage to such a prestigious job. ELS 89 They heard a loud smashing noise as a tree came down in a large gust. They took refuge under the gateway of a building and were not sure what to do. Sue doubted whether they would have the strength to cycle all the way home. But they couldn't just go on waiting there much longer. We'd better go then. If we can't ride our bikes we'll just have to push them. Or perhaps we'll be able to get a lift on a truck. Sue went out, her short hair blowing in the wind. It was impossible to speak, so she just beckoned to Anne to start out. As they pushed their bicycles unsteadily onto the road, Sue suddenly shouted, Hey. The wind's with us. Anne got onto her bicycle. There was no need to pedal - all she had to do was hold onto the handlebars. She felt an almost unreal sense of exhilaration, as if she were floating through the air. The wind's with us. Sue shouted again, her voice filled with surprise and elation. Even we have the wind with us sometimes, eh. 90 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. We understand that A) Sue and Anne were not far from home B) a building was damaged when the tree was blown down C) on this particular occasion, Sue and Anne were lucky D) the falling tree barely missed landing on Anne and Sue E) Sue and Anne were in a forest when the wind started 2. At first, the wind A) blew down the tree Sue and Anne were sheltering under B) made it impossible for Anne and Sue to hear each other C) prevented Sue and Anne from continuing their journey D) appeared to be with Sue and Anne E) caused Anne and Sue to fall off their bicycles 3. From Sue's first statement - The wind's with us. - it's clear that A) Sue was much braver than Anne B) the wind was blowing in the direction they were travelling C) the wind wasn't as strong as they'd originally thought D) she was trying to stop Anne from becoming too frightened E) the wind was starting to drop as they set out 1. I looked up and saw her frantically to me from across the road. 2. The injured dog was lying on the side of the road 3. The little boy let go of his balloon and laughed happily as it softly to itself. off above the trees. 4. When the rain started to pour down, we in an old church and stayed there until it stopped. 5. A bullet past his head, only narrowly missing him. The digestion is shut down, the blood pressure is raised, the heart speeds up, and the skin becomes cold. If maintained over a prolonged period, this emergency status makes the body - and the personality - tight, dry and rigid. In people who are afraid to let themselves pour forth their painful emotions, doctors find that suppressed tears can trigger such ailments as asthma, migraine headache, and many others. Weeping, on the other hand, comes as part of the reversal of conditions of alarm, shock and anger. Tears do not, therefore, mark a breakdown or low point, but a transition to warmth, hope and health. So there is a genuine wisdom in tears. In permitting ourselves to weep instead of repressing the impulse, we help ourselves to health. cause to happen k) illness, often painful and long-lasting though seemingly not serious I) crying m) turning round changing to become opposite n) collapse strong depression o) period or process of change from one condition to another p) real true q) urge feeling of having to do something 92 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. From the statement in the passage, we can infer that some people A) regard crying as a weakness or failure B) don't consult their doctors about certain ailments C) find that migraine headaches cause them to weep D) develop personality problems from ailments such as asthma E) go to the doctor for emotional reasons more than for physical 2. According to the writer, not crying A) is a common characteristic of asthmatics B) is a sign that a person is in poor health C) causes the digestion to shut down D) helps us to control our feelings of shock or anger E) can bring on many unpleasant side-effects 3. In the writer's opinion A) people should visit their doctors in times of emotional emergency B) we need to cry in order to recover from traumas C) weeping can cause alarm, shock, or even anger in others D) doctors don't do enough to help patients with emotional problems E) crying when we feel ill is as beneficial as visiting the doctor 1. When a broken bone is treated, it needs to be supported by something while it's mending so that it cannot move out of position. 2. The demonstration, which happened almost without warning, was by the government's announcement that taxes are going to be increased by thirty percent. 3. I think you are wrong about her just pretending to be interested in our case. I think her concern is 4. Ater twenty years as a teacher of indisciplined students he suffered a/an and was unable to work again. 5. to buy something new, I'd be absolutely broke in no time at all. ELS 93 j Science and technology are getting a bad press these days. Increasingly scornful of the materialism of our culture, some people speak about returning to a simpler, pre-industrial, pre-scientific day. They fail to realize that the good old days were actually horribly bad old days of ignorance, disease, slavery, and death. They fancy themselves in Athens, talking to Socrates or watching the latest play by Sophocles but never as a slave brutalized in the Athenian silver mines. They imagine themselves as medieval knights on armoured chargers but never as starving peasants. They also ignore the fact that, before modern technology, the full flower of art and human intellect was reserved for the few. It was the technical advances that brought many of the marvels of mankind to even the poorest. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a) be criticized in the media (phrase) b) feeling and showing that something deserves no respect showing contempt c) lack of knowledge d) system of people being owned by other people and having to work for them e) like the idea of imagine f) treated cruelly, violently, and inhumanely g) of the period in history from AD 1000 to about AD 1500 h) in the Middle Ages, a man - usually of noble birth - who had a high military rank and served the king in battle, and who is usually seen (in pictures, etc.) riding a horse and dressed in a protective metal suit i) covered with protective metal wear j) strong horse used by an army officer in battle, especially by high-ranking warriors during the Middle Ages k) suffering or dying from hunger I) person working on the land, often poor and considered to be of low status m) wonderful thing causing admiration and surprise 94 ELS 1 I I Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. In the writer's opinion, some people A) think that the good old days were actually very bad B) do not have a realistic image of the past C) marvel at the technical advances that have been made D) are unable to cope with the speed of advances in science and technology E) regard the Athenians as a brutal race 2. Those who have nostalgic feelings for the past A) usually work for the newspapers B) are well-read in the works of Sophocles C) would like to have lived then to help slaves and peasants D) have not yet discovered the full flower of art and human intellect E) criticize today's materialism 3. According to the writer, modern technology A) makes life too complicated and materialistic B) means there are no longer any starving peasants C) has benefited the rich and the poor alike D) has pushed art and human intellect aside E) actually developed from people such as Socrates 1. Far too many people throughout the world are by the government under which they live. 2. If you continue to be so of their efforts, they are likely to give up trying altogether. 3. I'm sure it's his of how to behave in such situations that makes him seem so awkward, not bad manners. 4. The Grand Canyon is one of the of North American scenery and 5. He has always himself as a professional footballer, but he never even played for the school team. ELS 95 Fourteen-year-old Nadia burst on the Olympic scene when she competed in 1976 in Montreal against Olga Korbut, the great young Russian gymnast. Olga had won two gold medals in the 1972 Olympics, and she was going to try to repeat her victories in 1976. As Nadia watched, Olga approached the uneven parallel bars, leaped up, caught hold of one bar, and began her routine. She flipped, twisted, and turned. The crowd cheered, and the judges awarded Olga a score of 9.90. It would take almost a perfect, score of 10.00 to beat Olga. Nadia was next. She jumped and grabbed the lower bar. She performed an incredible series of whirls and spins. She made a dazzling dismount, and stood straight as an arrow. The crowd applauded Nadia wildly. The judges were astonished by Nadia's performance and gave her a perfect score of 10.00. It was the first perfect gymnastic score in the history of the Olympic Games. Nadia won three gold medals and one silver in Montreal. Even with her perfect scores, however, she could not be called the greatest of all women gymnasts. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as brilliant impressive because of skill, quality or beauty k) action of getting off 96 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Until the 1976 Games in Montreal A) Nadia and Olga had not competed against each other B) no gymnast had ever achieved a maximum score at the Olympics C) gymnastics did not attract large audiences D) Olga Korbut was the most successful woman gymnast of all time E) the Romanian gymnasts had never won any gold medals 2. Nadia's perfect score in Montreal A) was a repeat of Larissa Latynina's past performances B) did not stop Olga Korbut winning two gold medals C) has never been achieved since D) gave Romania its first ever gold medal E) didn't make her the best female gymnast of all time 3. From the statement in the passage, it's clear that A) the minimum age for an Olympic competitor is fourteen B) gymnastic standards were higher in 1956, 1960 and 1964 than in 1976 C) Olga Korbut was hoping to win more gold medals in 1976 D) the Russians are rarely beaten by the Romanians at the Olympic Games E) Nadia was only better than Olga on the uneven parallel bars 1. He into the air to catch the ball, but it was too high for him. 2. Realizing she was late, she 3. The streets were filled with excited fans, celebrating their team's 4. As she was walking down the road in her new high-heeled shoes, she fell and her purse and ran out of the door. her ankle. 5. Not a sound came from the audience as they watched the dancers' performance. ELS 97 Some 1,500 people died - more casualties than in any other marine disaster in peacetime history. After striking a huge iceberg, the 46,500-ton vessel sank in less than three hours. Lloyd's of London, the firm which had insured the Titanic, had reasoned that the probability of such an event was one in a million. At 11 40 pm on the evening of the disaster, the lookout on the Titanic's bridge saw an ominous shape ahead. Ice. Dead ahead. he shouted. The helm was turned hard over and the engines were reversed, but it was too late. A 300-foot gash was ripped along the side of the Titanic's hull as though it were made of tin. If the lookout had not sighted the iceberg and the helmsman not turned the wheel, the Titanic would probably have struck the iceberg head-on. It is then likely that only the bow sections of the ship would have been flooded and, though seriously crippled, she would have remained afloat. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as make a contract, in which a specialized company agrees to pay the costs if there is an accident, damage, loss, etc. g) make a judgement based on careful thought h) being a sign of something bad or dangerous threatening i) directly in front (phrase) j) a lever or wheel for steering a ship k) as far as a ship's wheel can go (phrase) I) (be) made to move backwards m) a deep cut n) the main body of a ship o) with the front parts (hitting each other) p) the front part of a ship q) (of something or someone) weakened or damaged so that it or they cannot move properly r) on top of the water not sinking 98 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. All of the following statements are true except that A) more people died at sea in this incident than ever before B) the huge vessel did not even take as many as three hours to sink C) Lloyd's had thought the Titanic was extremely unlikely to sink D) the Titanic sank in the northern part of the Atlantic Ocean E) the Titanic was designed as an extremely comfortable ship 2. When the lookout noticed the iceberg A) the ship was travelling at the highest capacity B) he took some time to inform the helmsman of the danger C) the helmsman were trying to put the ship into reverse gear D) it was dangerously close to the side of the hull E) it was already too late to prevent the strike 3. The author implies that it would probably have been better if A) Lloyd's of London hadn't insured the Titanic B) the ship had been almost completely flooded C) the Titanic hadn't been so large and luxurious D) the iceberg hadn't been seen before the accident E) the ship had not taken more than three hours to sink 1. The child fell on an old piece of metal which was hidden in the grass, and got a nasty in his knee. 2. Although it's quite expensive, I always keep the contents of my flat against fire and theft. 3. The young girl in the wheelchair over there was in a motorbike accident several years ago and hasn't been able to walk ever since. 4. There was a/an silence when Lynne asked her boss, who was having a hard time in business, if her job was secure, and she realized she'd better start preparing her resume and looking for new employment. 5. Jake took the kids to the aquarium to see the fish and other creatures. ELS 99 F Akio Morita, the chairman of Sony Corporation in Japan, wanted a radio he could carry with him and listen to wherever he went. From that small desire was born the Sony Walkman, a radio small enough to be worn on a belt or carried in a pocket. Not all product development, however, is so easy. Most of today's products, including many of the basic necessities of food, clothing and shelter, are the result of creative research and thinking by staff. A new product is one that is new for the company that makes it. A hamburger, for example, is not new, but when McDonald's introduced the Big Mac, it was a new product for that company. Decisions to make a new product can be the result of technology and scientific discovery, but the discovery can be either accidental or sought for. The original punch-card dataprocessing machine was devised specifically for use by the Bureau of the Census. Penicillin, by contrast, was an accidental discovery and is now one of the most useful antibiotics. Products today are often the result of extensive market research to learn what consumers and retailers want. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as relating to one area k) covering a large area large in amount I) the activity of collecting and analyzing information about what people need and want to buy {phrase) m) a person who buys goods or uses services n) a person who buys goods from the manufacturer and sells to the public 100 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. In the passage, the Sony Walkman is referred to as A) the creation of a large marketing research team B) an example of uncomplicated product development C) superior to all similar devices produced afterwards D) something produced in response to in-depth market research E) a product invented by Akio Morita, the chairman of Sony 2. When the Big Mac was first introduced, it was A) the first hamburger ever to be put on the market B) the result of technical and scientific development C) the result of an accidental discovery at McDonald's D) a known item but a fresh product for McDonald's E) the first product ever produced by McDonald's 3. A new product nowadays A) must be something completely new to the consumer B) is always the result of creativity and invention C) is usually produced in response to consumer demand D) should be manufactured in large quantities to meet the huge demand E) is more often created or discovered by accident Luck is a very important part of success - a/an meeting at a party or at a friend's house has been known to lead to a new career or even to marriage. 2. Sarah has a fantastic apartment in downtown New York, but she's not really happy because she's always had a/an 3. to live in the countryside. Alex is a very interesting person to talk to because he has a/an knowledge of the history of London - there's really very little he doesn't know about the city and its past. 4. Copernicus revolutionized the way people thought about the solar system with his that the Earth and other planets revolve around the sun, and that the Earth, in fact, was not the centre of the universe. 5. Picasso's new and original way of painting illustrated his genius. ELS 101 The nose, ears, fingers, toes, and chin are the most susceptible. The involved part begins to tingle or hurt mildly and then becomes numb. Frozen tissue usually ranges from distinctly white in light-skinned people to ashen grey in dark-skinned people. Here are some tips to help rescue someone with frostbite 1. Remove the person from the cold as soon as possible. 2. Every effort should be made to protect the frozen part. If there is a chance that the part might refreeze before reaching medical care, it may be more harmful to thaw it and let it refreeze than to await arrival at the treatment area for thawing. 3. Rapid rewarming is essential. Do not rub the injured part as friction may cause further damage. Use lukewarm water or use warmed blankets. Within about 30 minutes, sensation may return to the part, which may become red, swollen, and painful. 4. When the part is warm, keep it dry and clean. If blisters appear, use sterile dressings. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a mass of cells which makes up a particular organ or part of the body g) unfreeze h) very important completely necessary i) apply pressure with a backwards-and-forwards or circular movement of the hand j) the force between two surfaces k) not very hot I) a thick covering used especially on beds to keep one warm m) feeling n) bigger than usual (usually for parts of the body) o) a painful, watery bump under the skin p) a covering for a cut or wound 102 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. We learn from the passage that frostbite A) is extremely painful from the moment it sets in B) only affects the nose, ears, fingers, toes, and chin C) is usually only slightly painful at the beginning D) is the most common injury in winter E) may occur anywhere and in any weather conditions 2. According to the passage, if you encounter someone with frostbite, first of all, you should A) massage the frozen body part gently B) unfreeze the affected part immediately C) wrap the affected part in sterile bandages D) warm the patient as quickly as possible E) use water as hot as the patient can bear 3. From the information given in the passage, we understand that the frozen body part...... A) is lost in most cases B) loses sensation C) becomes red D) has a bumpy appearance E) should be rubbed for rapid rewarming 1. Before the dentist starts working on your teeth, he gives you an injection which makes your mouth so that you don't feel any pain. 2. Kathy sprained her wrist and it became so 3. According to one study, pet owners are less that she couldn't wear her watch on that wrist because the strap was too small. to colds and headaches than people who don't have animals. Scientists think this is because pets help relieve stress, which is a major cause of illness. 4. Parachuting is an amazing experience - the of falling from 3000 metres above the Earth at 200 kilometres per hour is hard to describe. 5. It is to have a valid passport if you want to travel abroad. ELS 103 At the same time, the pig is frequently regarded as unclean and even untouchable by many people. In spite of their reputation, pigs are neither filthy nor stupid. Because their sweat glands are relatively ineffective in lowering body temperature, pigs seek relief from the heat by wallowing in mud or shallow waterholes. When provided with. a clean environment sheltered from the sun, however, pigs are fastidious. Furthermore, in tests of intelligence, pigs have proved to be among the smartest of all domestic animals - even more intelligent than dogs. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as very dirty disgusting j) as compared with something else k) try to find I) an easing of pain, discomfort, etc. m) roll around n) not deep o) place where water gathers and from which animals drink water p) excessively concerned about cleanliness overly fussy 104 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The author of the passage points out that A) the consumption of pork products is not very safe for health concerns B) though dirty, the pig is not too fiKhy to be touched C) pigs supply humans with very many types of products D) although the meat is unsafe, pigs can be a source of leather and brushes E) pigs are too unclean to be used in medical experiments 2. According to the facts in the passage, when pigs are provided with the right conditions, A) the quality of the pork meat is improved B) pigs are still extremely dirty C) pigs like to keep themselves clean D) bristles obtained from them for brushes are of better quality E) pigs can be raised commercially 3. It is emphasized in the passage that the pig's reputation as a filthy and stupid animal A) does not at all reflect the truth B) is wholly justified C) is actually a result of the stupidity and ignorance of people D) is only right to a certain extent E) decreases the demand for its products Mrs. Pollywinkle was in her daily cleaning routine. All ornaments were removed from the shelves and carefully dusted, individually, with her feather duster. 2. The only she got from the pain in her back was when she rubbed a mixture of pure lavender oil and almond oil carefully into the base of her spine. The pain would then subside for an hour or two. 3. We have been a replacement for the head gardener for two months now, but all the applicants have been either too young or not experienced enough for such a large ornamental garden. 4. Cashmere goats are the 5. The of the fine wool cashmere, which is used for making expensive shawls, sweaters and cardigans. people have of Arabs is of a people living in tents and riding camels, but actually nearly all of them live in apartments and use cars or buses. At the fair was the young Englishman Richard Blechynden, who represented the tea interests of India and Ceylon - now Sri Lanka. It was his job to popularize tea drinking in the United States. The weather that summer turned quite hot, and Blechynden watched as people passed by his booth to others that were serving cold drinks. In desperation, he filled tall glasses with ice and poured hot tea over it. Iced tea was an immediate success. The invention of tea bags happened almost simultaneously. Thomas Sullivan of New York City owned a tea and coffee business. In sending samples of tea to customers, he decided it would be cheaper to sew the tea inside small cloth bags instead of sealing it in tins. To his surprise, orders for the tea bags poured in. Tea bags are now made of a special filter paper, and the manufacturing and packing of them has become an industry in itself to meet the great demand. Instant, or powdered, tea has become common on grocery shelves along with bulk and bag teas. Instant teas offer greater convenience than ordinary leaf tea as they are easy to prepare and leave no leaf sediment. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as close food containers to stop air getting in and spoiling the food k) come in great number or amount (phrase) I) ready for immediate use, with little or no preparation m) a large quantity n) the state of being easy to use without difficulty o) common accustomed p) matter that settles on the bottom of a liquid 106 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, Richard Blechynden's employment involved A) making tea drinking popular to those from India and Ceylon B) informing people of the benefits of hot drinks C) making the drinking of tea more common in America D) teaching Americans how to make tea E) inventing tea bags out of a special filter paper 2. It is clear from the passage that iced tea became an immediate success because A) Americans prefer drinking from tall glasses B) the people were interested in tea from India and Ceylon C) it was very easy to prepare a glass of iced tea D) Richard Blechynden was good at persuading people to try his innovation E) it fit with people's needs during the hot summer weather 3. We can conclude from the passage that it was through the efforts of innovative people that, today, A) tea drinking has become so common and so easy B) a lot of expositions take place all over the world C) the tea industry is enjoying a remarkable boom D) people are abandoning fizzy drinks in favour of tea E) a lot of people find employment in the tea industry 1. I was sure that I had bought toothpaste, but it was not among my when I emptied the shopping bags. 2. The two trapeze performers flew through the air and performed a complicated acrobatic movement before both returning to the swing. 3. In order to his new health food shop, John Harvey handed out leaflets on the benefits of healthy eating. 4. The opening of the new supermarket near our home has given me the of doing my shopping daily. 5. Jars of jam are in the factory, which means they can remain unopened for two years. ELS 107 Nobody in the 19th century contributed more than he did to make the concept of fine restaurant dining a reality in America. Delmonico, born in Switzerland in 1813, went to New York at the age of 19 and worked with relatives in a catering firm. He soon opened a restaurant that offered an unusually large menu, including a great variety of European dishes never before served in the United States. He also served American wild game as well as a selection of wines. The success of the restaurant inspired him to open branch restaurants, including the internationally renowned Delmonico's on the corner of Broadway and 26th Street in New York City. His organization also operated its own farm in nearby Brooklyn and temporarily ran a hotel. His fame as a restaurateur brought many imitators, and between them they helped make New York City one of the primary culinary centres in the world. He was largely responsible for making the restaurant an accepted and popular institution. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as animals, birds, and fish which are hunted for food and for sport (phrase) g) encourage someone to do something h) famous i) not permanently lasting only for a short time j) a person who copies, especially one who copies a style k) together (phrase) I) related to the kitchen or cooking m) the cause of (something) (phrase) 108 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. One of the factors that made Delmonico's first restaurant different from other restaurants was that A) a choice of free wine was provided along with the meal ordered B) it used special serving dishes which were imported from Europe C) the range of food on offer at the restaurant was uncommonly large D) much of the food was freshly imported from European countries E) it was the first American restaurant to serve European cuisine 2. It is clear from the passage that Delmonico A) opened a chain of restaurants which he called Delmonico's B) was first involved with the catering service in Switzerland C) created his style by imitating other famous restaurants D) purchased most of the ingredients of the food he served from a nearby farm E) ran a hotel on a farm not far from New York for a while 3. We learn from the passage that Delmonico A) went out of business when larger restaurants came into existence B) opened the very first restaurant in New York City C) ran a catering business with his relatives in Switzerland before he left D) managed his organization as a family business E) played a major role in establishing the concept of the restaurant in the USA 1. When Bob and Laura arrived in Istanbul, they had only $35 Bob had just $10, and Laura $25. 2. While working seven days a week was unpleasant, we knew we were only doing it 3. Although I saw it happen, I'm not sure which car was and that in two weeks' time, things would be back to normal. the accident, because it all happened so fast. 4. The reason for her resignation was having to work night-shift every four days, although there were a few other reasons as well. 5. Violet's childhood in India helped to her to write her first novel, which was set in Delhi. ELS 109 He wore a single rough woollen garment in all seasons and went barefoot. Talking to whoever would listen, he asked questions, criticized answers, and poked holes in faulty arguments. His style of conversation has been given the name Socratic dialogue . He was the first of the three great teachers of ancient Greece - the other two being Plato and Aristotle. Today, he is ranked as one of the world's greatest moral teachers. His self-control and powers of endurance were unmatched. In appearance he was short and fat, with a snub nose and wide mouth. Despite his unkempt appearance, the Greeks of his day enjoyed being with him and talking with him and were fascinated by what he had to say. Socrates did not write any books or papers. The details of his life and doctrine are preserved in the Memorabilia of the historian Xenophon and in the dialogues of the philosopher Plato. It was chiefly through Plato and Plato's brilliant disciple Aristotle that the influence of Socrates was passed on to succeeding generations of philosophers. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as untidy ungroomed k) extremely interested I) a set of beliefs m) mainly n) a follower of a great leader or teacher o) the effect that someone has on behaviour, events or opinions p) coming after following Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Socrates A) wasn't at all interested in material things B) called his conversations Socratic dialogues C) wore unattractive clothes and heavy sandals D) didn't point out others' mistakes plainly, but implicitly E) had no influence or fame in his lifetime 2. Socrates' fellow Athenians A) did not know anything about his real identity B) were fascinated by his appearance C) mocked him because of his appearance D) eagerly read all of his works E) enjoyed learning about his ideas 3. After Socrates' death A) his doctrine was forgotten until Plato revived it B) Xenophon preserved his autobiography C) other philosophers ensured his continuing influence D) it was discovered that he had kept a personal diary E) people came to realize what a great philosopher he was Steffi Graf was for many years as number one on the women's tennis circuit. 2. For a long-distance runner, is more important than speed. Some of the races are so long that if they don't have the stamina, they'll never succeed. 3. I got caught in the rain on my way to the interview, so by the time I arrived, I felt rather and unfortunately, I didn't even have time to comb my hair before I went in. 4. Rocky Marciano was the greatest boxer of his time. His ability as a fighter was - he was never beaten in the ring. 5. Mark took the children to the aquarium and they were so by the fish and other underwater life that it was difficult to get them to leave. I Several old jokes common amongst the scientific disciplines illustrate the difference between the mathematical mind and that of other disciplines. One goes as follows An engineer, a physicist and a mathematician are all staying at a hotel one night when a fire breaks out. The engineer wakes up and smells the smoke he quickly grabs a garbage pail to use as a bucket, fills it with water from the bathroom, and puts out the fire in his room. He then refills the pail and douses everything flammable in the room with water. He then goes back to sleep. The physicist wakes up, smells the smoke, jumps out of bed. He picks up a pad and pencil and makes some calculations, glancing frequently at the flames. He then measures exactly 15.6 liters of water into the garbage pail, and throws it on the flames, which are extinguished. Smiling, he returns to sleep. Finally the mathematician wakes up. He too grabs a pad and begins fervently writing, glancing at the flames, and then writing more. After a while, he gets a satisfied look on his face entering the bathroom, he produces a match, lights it, and then extinguishes it with a bit of running water. Aha. A solution exists, he murmurs, and goes back to sleep. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as physics, anthropology, etc. b) make a point clear by using examples or stories c) pick up or take something roughly d) stop a burning fire by throwing water over it e) able to catch fire easily f) a number of pieces of paper fixed together along one side, so that a piece can be torn off once it has been used g) something worked out mathematically h) take a brief look at something i) strongly and enthusiastically j) pleased about getting what you wanted k) speak softly or indistinctly 112 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The passage seeks to show A) how brave engineers are when faced with dangerous situations B) how many liters of water are required to extinguish the average hotel fire C) that mathematicians are not as practical as other professionals D) that mathematicians, engineers, and physicists react in the same way in emergencies E) that mathematics is of no use in practical situations 2. We can conclude from the passage that A) engineers move from the practical to the theoretical B) this incident happened before the invention of fire extinguishers C) mathematicians are more intelligent than engineers or physicists D) physics forms the basis of some other disciplines E) engineering is the most practical of the disciplines mentioned 3. The author of the passage illustrates that the mathematician A) died in the fire which the story refers to B) was contented just to know that the fire could be extinguished C) was much cleverer than the engineer or the physicist D) wasn't woken up by the fire in the hotel he was staying in E) measured the amount of water required more accurately than the physicist 1. Public relations used to form part of general business subjects or marketing and has only 2. The police officer used a secretly filmed video to recently been offered by universities as a separate how aware drug dealers are of surveillance and how they check they are not being watched before making their illegal transactions. Of course, they didn't spot the hidden camera on this occasion. 3. Most old soft furniture is highly while modern furniture is required by law to be fire retardant. 4. The journalist carries a computer and an electronic diary with her on her travels, but still prefers to use a 5. and pencil for taking notes. People with perfectionist personalities are never that anything is done well enough. ELS 113 The growth of the newspaper, the development of the magazine, the universality of popular education with its increase in human curiosity - most of all, the increasing pace of modern life, its speed of living and competitive pressure - gave this literary type its greatest encouragement. Here is the people's literature, and the most democratic of all forms of writing because it offers a means for the use of every conceivable sort of plot, character or background. It's just the right length in a world of tumult and hurry it is a form that presents things concisely and graphically, and it is the type of writing most easily understood by every kind of reader. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a) desire or eagerness to know about things b) speed rate of progress c) trying to be more successful than others d) method which makes something possible way of achieving something e) imaginable that can be believed possible f) story line g) situation in which a story, etc., is set h) confusion and excitement i) with a lot of information, but no unnecessary words or details j) with descriptions that give a clear picture in the mind 114 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Writers of short stories A) find it hard to keep up with the pace of modern life B) prefer to be published in newspapers or magazines C) are not restricted in their choice of subject D) feel under pressure to be competitive E) generally come from democratic countries 2. The way the short story is written A) is popular with newspaper and magazine editors B) shows how competitive the authors are C) indicates whether its writer comes from a democracy or not D) puts the authors under a lot of pressure E) makes it possible for everyone to understand it 3. According to the writer, the short story A) suits the modern way of life B) is most frequently found in newspapers and magazines C) puts pressure on other literary types D) is in need of a lot of encouragement E) increases human curiosity 1. Being able to express your ideas is a great asset, as managers these days don't have time to read long,