begin to have sexual relations with each other secretly · to be having a secret love affair Mercimeği fırına vermişler de kimse farketmemiş. They've been having a secret love affair and nobody noticed. meteliğe kurşun atmak/sıkmak to throw lead to a small amount of money Kemal meteliğe kurşun atıyor, en kısa zamanda iş bulup para kazanması gerek. Kemal is flat broke, he has to find a job to be penniless to be flat broke 167 and earn some money right away. metelik vermemek to not give a tiny amount of money to have low Benim için ne derlerse regard for sb desinler, metelik ver(or sth) mem. I don't care what others may say, for me the designs aren't worth a damn. meydan okumak to read town center/public square to challenge, Meclis'te toplantı düdefy zenledi -- yine meydan okudu. A public-meeting was arranged in the [Turkish] Parliament -and again she defied it. 1. meydan vermek 2. meydan vermemek 1. to give town center/public square 2. to not give town center/public square 1. to give (sb) a chance (to do sth), to allow sth to happen 2. to not give (sb) a chance (to do sth), to not allow sth to happen meydana atmak to throw to the town center/ public square to suggest, to Sağlıkevi düşüncesini bring up, to meydana attım, herkes broach hemen benimsedi. [When] I suggested the idea of a health clinic, everyone immediately accepted the idea [as if it were their own]. meydana atılmak to be thrown in the town center/public square to be brought up, to be suggested, to be broached, to leap into ac- Kavga dövüş etmelerine meydan vermemeye çalışıyorduk. We were trying to prevent the ones who were quarreling and fighting. Mağaraya girme işinde meydana atılan iki kişiden biriydi. She was one of two people who volunteered for the job of entering the cave. 168 tion, [for a person] to volunteer himself or herself for the goal of completing a task meydana bırakmak to leave in the town center/public square to give (sb) a chance to do sth, to allow (sth to happen) meydana çıkarmak to bring before the town center/public square to reveal, to bring to light, to expose, to make sth public meydana çıkmak to go out to the town center/public square to be revealed, become evident, be seen in public · Kim söylediyse o sözü, meydana çıkıp açıklasın, haydi bekliyorum.. Whoever said those words [about me], let her be revealed and let her explain. Come on...I'm waiting.. · See another example sentence at foyası meydana çıkmak. meydana dökmek to pour in town center/public square to make sth public, reveal Çaldığı eşyaları meydana dökmüştü işte... As you see, he revealed [all of] the things he stole... meydana gelmek to come to the town cen- to come into existence, Dünyanın en süratli otomobillerinin yarıştığı 169 ter/public square become a reality, to happen, occur Formula 1 yarışlarında kazalar sadece pistte savrulan, birbirine çarpan arabalar arasında meydana gelmiyor. Accidents in Formula 1 speed races (of the fastest cars in the world) don't only happen between cars that hit each other, scattering [them] on the race course. meydana getirmek to bring to the town center/public square to bring forth, to produce, to do, to be the cause of sth Koca Ali emsalsiz işler meydana getirdi. Big Ali produced matchless works. meydanda kalmak to remain in the town center/public square to be left jobless, homeless, to be in a bad way meydana koymak to put in the town center/public square to produce, create, set forth, to present, to reveal meydana vurmak to strike to the town center/ public square meydanı boş bulmak to reveal sth clearly, to be obvious to find empty in to find an the town center/ opportunity public square to do sth (when there is no one or nothing to prevent one's doing it) Onlar meydanı boş bulmuş, köylülere istediklerini yaptırmışlar. They did what they wanted to the villagers -[because] there was no one to stop them. 170 to make/do ... ... to hem and haw and make feeble excuses Mısır'daki sağır sultan duydu. the deaf sultan in Egypt heard · Everybody May be used as shown. and his brother has heard about it. · The word is all over town. minareyi çalan kılıfını hazırlar those who steal a minaret prepare the hole (to put it in) If you're going to commit a significant crime, plan it carefully in advance. May it be blessed... same meaning mırın kırın etmek Note Neither mırın nor kırın have meaning, except in this idiom. Serves as both an idiom and a proverb. Mübarek olsun... This may be said in an agreement between rivals... mühür kimde ise Süleyman odur whoever has the · sb who is seal is Solomon 'authorized' · sb powerful and dominant Gelemem diye mırın kırın etti, sonra razı oldu. Saying I can't come , he hemmed and hawed -- and finally agreed. Haberci Bu anlaşmayı kabul edecek misiniz. Hayreddin Paşa Mübarek olsun. Messenger Will you accept this agreement. Admiral Hayreddin [Babarossa] Let the agreement be blessed. Saraya doluşan ahaliye Peygamberlik mühürü gösteren düzenbazlar, İşte mühür, mühür kimde ise, gerçek Süleyman odur... demişlerdi. Tricksters who 171 showed the seal of the prophet (to the people who visited the palace) said, Look here's the seal, and whoever has the seal... he is the real Solomon. color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter N The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning Comments and Examples ne oldum delisi olmak what I (for sb lucky) to became to start to think be crazy he's/she's sth special Zenginleşince ne oldum delisi oldu. When he became rich, he thought he really was something else. ne olur ne olmaz what it becomes, what it won't become just in case Ne olur, ne olmaz yanımıza fazla para alalım. Just in case, let's take extra money with us. ne olursa olsun what if be, let it be come what may, whatever the consequences Yüzünü bir dağıtayım sonra ne olursa olsun. Let me punch this guy, and live with the consequences afterwards. May be used as shown. Ne sen sor, ne What you Adds positive or ben söyleye- ask, what negative emphasis I'll say. to the preceding yim. statement or question -- most often negative. But as in English, an exaggerated negative 172 can end up being a positive. For example, in English we might say, Do you think Sharon Stone is attractive. and the answer might come back, Ooo, she's bad. (Ne sen sor, ne ben söyleyeyim.) 1. neme lazım 1. neces2. neme lasary to my what. 1. a. He/she/it doesn't concern me. b. What need have I of .... What good is ... to me. c. I still think ... I don't care about that, I still think ... 2. sb who has an I-don't-give-adamn attitude nerede/nerde akşam orada/orda sabah where he is in the evening is where he is in the morning · Said of one who doesn't appear to have home who just spends the night where he/ she happens to be. · one who has no known residence · one who is an idler · one who's out of work · one who's dis- · Amerika acayip bir memlekettir, bakarsınız gelecek sene seçim olur, neme lazım deyip projeden vazgeçer. America is a strange country, you'll see next year there'll be an election. [America] will say, 'What good is this to me.' and drop the project. In an article questioning the USA's staying power in the Middle East. · Neme lazım, iyi çocuktur. I don't care about that, I still think he's a good kid. Çok sorumsuz bir adam, nerde akşam orda sabah. He's an unreliable man, he has no place to call his own. 173 tracted, confused to make/do number · to pretend, fake Hiç kimse bana böyle nu· [-a/-e] to make a mara yapamaz. Nobody fool out of, pull a can pull a fast one on me. fast one on sb nur topu or nurtopu light ball a lovely child Nur içinde yatsın... Let him/her go to bed in light... May he/she sleep May be used as shown. in heavenly light... [Said of a departed loved-one.] numara yapmak Similar to ayak atmak. Beyefendi müjde. Nur topu gibi bir çocuğunuz oldu. Good news, dear sir. You've got a lovely [new] child. color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter O The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' Comments and Examples English Meaning o sayede in this/that shadow thanks to this/that [reason], so, therefore Şirket o sayede ayakta kalabildi. Thanks to that [reason], the corporation was able to survive. [...to stay on its feet.] objektif karşısına geçmek to pass opposite an objective to pose for a camera See example sentence at el üstünde tutulmak. [-ın, -in, -un, -ün] to plant a fig/kernel to ruin or do away with sb's Kumara alıştırmış, böylece ocağına incir dikmişlerdi. Note This idiom means the same as bu sayede and nearly the same as sayesinde. 174 ocağına incir/ darı dikmek in the fireplace family They became addicted to gambling and, just like that, it ruined their family. okkanın altına gitmek/girmek to go/enter under the 'oka' (a measurement of weight) · be the victim · bear the brunt of sth · get blamed · fall into a bad situation, either uselessly or unjustly Dikkat et okkanın altına gidersen karışmam. Be careful, if you're going to be blamed, [then] I won't get involved. olacak (olan) olur it will be as it will be · what will be, Ne yaparsan yap, olacak will be olan olur. Do what you · it will be as it must, what will be will be. is fated to be oldum bittim I was, I finished See oldum olası. oldum olası(ya) I was prob- for as long as able I've known, for as long as anyone can remember, from time immemorial, always · Person A Bizim şu Cola Turka'yı nasıl buldun. Person B Vallahi, zaten oldum olası şu 'cola'lı içeçekler ile aram pek iyi değildir...Bu nedenle içmediğim için Cola Turka'nın içimi, lezzeti hakkında olumlu ya da olumsuz bir fikrim yok... Person A How do you find this [new] Cola Turka of ours. For that reason, I haven't drunk it [myself], so I don't have either a positive or a negative opinion 175 about the taste or flavor of Cola Turka... · Oldum olasıya Gümüldür'de mi oturuyorsun. Have you always lived in Gümüldür. olmak üzere on the point to become 1. being who/which is/are of whom/which is/are 2. to be about to to be on the point of being 3. (along) with (sb/sth) (who is doing sth) 1. İşyerimizde, ikisi Fransız olmak üzere, yirmi eleman var. There are twenty employees at our workplace, two of whom are French. 2. Sezer, bu yasama yılında 3'ü Anayasa değişikliği olmak üzere toplam 12 yasayı Mecliş'e geri gönderdi. In this legislative year, (Turkish President) Sezer has returned to the Turkish Parliament a total of 12 bills that were about to change the 3rd Turkish Constitution. See another example sentence at bir sıçrarsın çekirge, etc. olsa olsa if be if be at the most, at most · Olsa olsa oraya dört saatte gidilir. It takes at the most four hours to get there. · Olsa olsa akraba, eş dost ve yakın kadınlara gösterilir. It is shown at most to the family and close women friends and acquaintances. olur olmaz he/she/it becomes, he/she/it doesn't become · just any old, whatever, any (of sth) · at random, whenever, · Olur olmaz kişilerle arkadaş olmayın. Don't be friends with just any old people. · Herkesi olur olmaz se- 176 without thinking beplerle haraca kesiyorlar. They extract protection money for any old reason from anyone. · Olur olmaz konuşma. Don't speak up whenever you feel like it. orta yaşlı middleaged same meaning ortada fol yok, yumurta yok/yokken (while) there is no nest egg, there is no egg for no apparent reason whatsoever there is no proof of its existence Ortada fol yok yumurta yokken kavga çıkardı. An argument started up for no apparent reason. [...while there was no apparent reason.] ortalık düzelmek for the surroundings to be put in order for law and order to be restored, for public morals to improve Ortalık düzeldi, herkes işine döndü. Law and order was restored, and everyone returned to work. ortaya almak to take to the middle to surround ortaya atmak to throw to to suggest, the middle throw (sth) out for consideration Also see fol yok yumurta yok. ortaya atılmak to be thrown in center · to be suggested, be proposed, thrown out for Same as meydana atmak... Sağlıkevi düşüncesini ortaya attım, herkes hemen benimsedi. [When] I suggested the idea of a health clinic, everyone immediately accepted the idea [as if it were their own]. Same as meydana atılmak... Mağaraya girme işinde or- 177 consideration · to go forth, sally forth ortaya bir balgam atmak to throw an expectoration to the middle throw a monkey wrench into the works, to say sth to upset matters (just at the point when all's going well), to drop a malicious hint ortaya çıkarmak to put in the middle · to expose, reveal, bring to light, create ortaya çıkmak to go to the · to be remiddle vealed · to appear, come on the scene · to show up on the scene · for sth to come to light ortaya dökmek to pour to to disclose, taya atılan iki kişiden biriydi. She was one of two people who volunteered for the job of entering the cave. Vatandaşlara bedava İncil dağıtan 3 misyoner yakalandı. Afyon'da, Ekim ayında bir otelde toplantı yapacakları ortaya çıkınca oluşan tepkiler nedeniyle, rezervasyonları iptal edilen misyonerler dün Afyon sokaklarında ortaya çıktı. Headline Three missionaries get nabbed for distributing free Bibles to [Turkish] citizens. Missionaries (who cancelled their reservations because of reactions that arose when it came to light that they'd have a meeting in an Afyon hotel in October) showed up in the streets of Afyon yesterday. 178 the middle make public ortaya düşmek to fall to the middle to become a prostitute ortaya koymak to put to the middle · to indicate (that), suggest (that), reveal (that), prove (that) · to bring up (a matter), put forth (sth) for consideration · to create, produce to drive to the middle ortaya sürmek ortaya vurmak to strike to the middle to not come to the game oyuna gelmemek Açlık sınırının 453 milyona çıktığını ortaya koyan araştırmanın yorumu Türk halkı cennetlik. The interpretation of research (indicating that the poverty level has climbed to 453 million Turkish Lira [monthly]) is that the Turkish people are deserving of going to heaven. to bring up, expose, reveal to expose, make public to not be deceived MHP'li Ünal oyuna gelmedi. color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter Ö The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning Öfke baldan tatlıdır… Anger is sweeter than honey. same mean- May be used as shown. ing Serves as both an Comments and Examples 179 idiom and a proverb. The ox is öküz öldü ortaklık ayrıldı/bozuldu/bitti dead, the partnership is separated/ broken/ ended. öküz(ün) altında buzağı aramak Also seen as dananın altında buzağı aramak. ölme eşeğim ölme (çayır çimen bitecek). Also seen as · ölme eşeğim ölme yaza yonca bitecek · ölme eşeğim ölme yaz gelip yonca bitecek/biçerim Now that the thing that held them together is no more, they have parted company. Öküz öldü ortaklık bitti. Artık selam bile vermiyor. After what held them together was no more, they parted company. They don't even greet each other anymore (...a greeting is not given anymore). to search for an unweaned calf under an ox · to try to account for what one is doing with ridiculous excuses · to try to place blame on others by using untruthful, fabricated pretexts · to try to use sleazy, illogical tactics against sb · to 'bark up the wrong tree' Rakiplerimiz bizi yıpratarak, çeşitli bahanelerle bizi suçlu göstermeye çalışıyorlar. Çok dikkatli olun. Bugünlerde herkes öküzün altında buzağı arıyor. Our competitors are wearing us out, trying to make us look guilty using various pretexts. Be very careful. These days everybody is using such sleazy tactics. Don't die, donkey, don't die (the meadow, the wild grass will end). · sth that is needed right now, not in the distant future -- because, later, the need for it will have passed. Bana parayı şimdi vermezsen, bir hafta içinde oturduğumuz ev satılacak. Parayı iki ay sonra verirsen, ölme eşeğim ölme, yaza yonca bitecek. If you don't give me the money right now, our home will be sold within a week. If you give me the 180 to keep on waiting like this, I may as well regard the whole thing as doomed to failure. money two months from now, it will be of no use to me. ölüm döşeği death mat- deathbed tress Çizgi filmlerinin unutulmaz ismi Bullwinkle ölüm öşeğinde. Bullwinkle (an unforgettable name in cartoon films) is on his deathbed. ölüm kalım (meselesi) death survival (problem) Savaş ölüm kalım meselesidir. War is a matter of life and death. ölümlü dünya (the) (the) mortal world with world death, deathly world ölür müsün, öldürür Do you die, do müsün you kill. a matter of life and death, a matter on which everything hinges · Feeling despair when in a difficult personal situation... · I've been put in an impossible situation. Ölümlü dünyada 'birisine minnettar kalmak' üzüntülerin en ağırı idi. In the mortal world, the heaviest of his sorrows was 'being in debt to someone.' Bak şimdi bu vaziyet karşısında sen olsan ne yaparsın, ölür müsün öldürür müsün, ben ne söylüyorum, o ne diyor. Look now, if you were faced with this situation...what would you do. I've been put in an impossible situation. What I'm saying (is this), what he's 181 saying is that. öne sürmek to drive to the front · to suggest, propose, offer · to set forth Projenin menajeri bir takım bahaneler öne sürmektedir. The project manager keeps offering a bunch of excuses. öp babanın elini kiss your father's hand · What's to be done now. · I don't know what to do now. Tam banyoya gireceğim anda sular kesildi. Öp babanın elini. At the very moment I was going to enter the bath, the water was cut off. What am I going to do now. öyleyse (öyle ise) in that same mean- Öyleyse ikilemeleri oluşcase, if so, ing… turan sözcükler, ancak then belirli bir sıraya göre kalıplaşmış olarak kullanılabilirler. In that case, words that form 'doublets' may be called clichés -- but only if they are in a specific order. özlük işleri person works matters pertaining to personnel excuse bigger than the fault The excuse that sb puts forth for doing sth (wrong) is even worse than the original (wrong) thing done - Also seen as zat işleri. özrü kabahatinden büyük Also seen as özürü kabahatinden büyük. Person A Karakola getirilen hırsız aslında silah almak için para çaldığını söyledi. Person B Desene özrü kabahatinden büyük. Person A The thief being taken to the police station actually said that 182 - so that the excuse makes matters worse. he stole the money in order to buy a gun. Person B You don't say...He's only made matters worse for himself. özsaygısı (azalmış) personal (undervalued) respect (low) selfesteem özü sözü doğru self remark truth [one who is] very honest, very trustworthy Emir Sultan, sözleri ve ögütleriyle, Anadolu'nun aydınlık getiren, özü sözü doğru mürşidi olmuştu. Emir Sultan became a very trustworthy mentor, who helped bring about the enlightenment of Anatolia with his advice and counsel. [-den/-dan] özür dilemek to wish (valid) excuse to beg (sb's) pardon to apologize (to) to make an apology (to) Sonradan ben de pişman oldum. Sizden özür dilemeye geldim. Afterwards, I also regretted (it). [So] I came to apologize to you. özürü kabahatinden See özrü büyük kabahatinden büyük. color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter P The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning Comments and Examples 183 [-ın, -in, -un, -ün] pabucu (pabuçları, pabucunu, papucu) dama atılmak [for] shoe(s) to to lose fabe thrown to vor to fall the roof from popular esteem to seem less appealing to look pale by comparison · Televizyon yaygınlaşınca radyonun pabucu dama atıldı. When television became widespread, radio lost favor. · Küçük doğunca büyüğün pabucu dama atılır mı hiç. When the little one was born, did the older one lose favor at all. · 1600 adet eklenebilir sözlük ve terim bankası ile Babylon, eski sözlüklerimizin pabucunu dama atıyor. Babylon (with its 1600 varieties word-andterm bank, that can be augmented) makes our older dictionaries look pale by comparison. pabuç bırakmamak to not leave a shoe not to be frightened off by, not to be afraid of another's threats, not to be deterred by Eğer arsanızı onlara satmazsanız, sizi döveceklerini söylüyorlar. Ben öyle kuru gürültüye pabuç bırakmam, beni korkutamazlar. If you don't sell your land to them, they are saying that they'll beat you up. I'm not afraid of such blustering they can't scare me. pabuç pahalı a shoe is expensive · It's a job (or some work, business, or endeavor) that is seriously dangerous. · Bakmış pabuç pahalı, hemen oradan tüymüş. [He had a look], saw it as being very dangerous business, and immediately sneaked off from there. · Önceleri şirketin iflas edeceğinden korkmuyordu ama baktı ki pabuç pahalı, var gücüyle çalışıp 184 · As he's too powerful for me to tangle with, I'd better not press matters any further. · I've bitten off more than I can chew. · sth seriously dangerous · sth in serious danger şirketi kurtardı. The others before him weren't worrying that the company was going bankrupt, but he saw that it was in serious danger. [So] he worked with all his might and saved the company. · Kabadayı bir nara attı, ama karşısındaki bıçağını çekince, baktı pabuç pahalı kaçmaya başladı. The 'tough guy' swore [at the other guy], but face-to-face when [the other guy] pulled a knife, he [the 'tough guy'] saw [that] he'd bitten off more than he could chew and he started to flee. to fill the shoe with sand (for stone to slip into the shoe) · to be uneasy, nervous, apprehensive, worried -because of a situation, event, occurrence · to meet with an obstacle · to be wretched and poor, to be unsuccessful at work Rüşvet olayının iyice araştırılacağı söyle-nince Charlie'nin pabucuna kum doldu. When it was announced that the bribery (event) would be thoroughly investigated, Charlie became very nervous. paçaları (paçasını, for the trotters paçayı) kaptırmak (trotter) to get caught · to be unable to escape İstiyor istemesine ama yapamıyor bir kez paçasını öyle bir kaptırmış ki, pabucuna kum dolmak (taş kaçmak) 185 paçaları sıvamak some situation (or business, or personal relationship) that you started but which you'd now like to drop · to get involvedin a situation (or business, or personal relationship) and not be able to get out of it arkadaşlarının elinden kendini sıyıramıyor. She wants to [make a] demand, but she can't. Once she got trapped like that [in the relationship], she couldn't extricate herself from the control of her friends. to plaster the trotters to prepare to do a job with all your strength and desire, to roll up one's sleeves Paçaları sıvayıp işe koyulduk, akşama doğru da işi yarılamış gibiydik. We 'rolled up our sleeves' and began doing the job -- and by evening we'd finished nearly half of it. to turn a piece of worn out cloth (to remove a piece of worn out cloth) · to be openly and vehemently critical in reporting the faults of sth or sb · to exhaust, to · Toplantıda Müdür Bey Sema'yı çok ağır eleştirdi, paçavraya çevirdi vallahi. The Boss criticized Ms. Sema very heavily in the meeting. He blasted her, it's really true. · Kitabı çıkar çıkmaz okumuş, üzerine iki yazı Also see kolları sıvamak. paçavraya çevirmek (paçavrasını çıkarmak) 186 wear sb to a frazzle, to leave sb drained of strength · to make a mess of, to ruin yazmıştı. Her iki yazıda da paçavrasını çıkarmıştı kitabın. As soon as the book was published he read it, and he wrote two news articles about it. And in both articles he tore the book to pieces. (…he was openly and vehemently critical of the book.) Papaz her gün (zaman/vakit) pilav yemez. See Her gün papaz pilav yemez. para yemek money food · to spend money freely · to accept a bribe Manken Gizem Özdilli, 'Bugüne kadar hiçbir sevgilimin parasını yemedim, benim bankaya değil, seveceğim erkeğe ihtiyacım var' dedi. Model Gizem Özdilli said, Up to now, I haven't spent freely any of my lover's money whatsoever, I need the man I love, not a bank. Parayı veren düdüğü çalar. The one who gives the money plays the whistle. The one who pays the piper calls the tune. May be used as shown. parmakla göstermek/gösterilmek to show with fingers to be famous, wellknown Şirkette herkes bizi parmakla gösteriyor. At the company we are well known by everyone. [-a/-e] pas vermek to give a pass 1. to pass the ball to (one's teammate) 2. (for a woman) to Güzel ve seksi olduğu kadar da cilveli-işveli olduğu için çapkınları etrafında pervane eden Yeliz, kalbini bir süreliğine yeni aşklara kapalı tuttuğunu 187 give (a man) a come hither look, make a pass at pat diye saying Bam./Whop./ Whomp. pek ala very very good · All right./ Okay./ Very well. · most certainly · perfectly good, quite adequate · If that's so, then.... · Note In the Elementary School system, pekâlâ is the highest grade/mark that a Turkish child can receive. Also seen as pekâlâ. Also see bal gibi. söyleyerek hiçbirine pas vermedi. Yeliz (who makes womanizers spin around like propellers because she is very flirtatious, and so beautiful and sexy) hasn't made a pass at anyone -saying that her heart has been closed to new loves for a while. · with a thud, thump, whop, or crash · suddenly · Pek ala yapacağım. I will most certainly do it. · Beni pekâlâ anladı. She understood me very well. · Pek ala bir saat. Nesini beğenmiyorsun. It's a perfectly good watch. What don't you like about it. · Pek ala, niçin öyle yapmadın. If so, then why didn't you do it that way. 188 pek sayılmaz it be not counted not actually, not quite, not exactly piyasaya çıkarmak to remove to the market · to put (a product) on the market · to publish Türk Sineması'nın unutulmaz oyuncularından Hüseyin Baradan, 'Bu Gözler Nerede Gördü' adlı kitabını piyasaya çıkardı. Hüseyin Baradan (our unforgettable Turkish Cinema actor) has published a book called 'Where These Eyes Have Seen'. posta koymak to put post to make a fool out of Hiç kimse bana böyle posta koyamaz. Nobody can make a fool of me like this. pot kırmak to break an to say sth unwanted wrong, pucker/wrinkle put one's foot in one's mouth, make a faux pas Also see çam devirmek. pusulayı şaşırmak for the compass to be bewildered · to lose one's bearings to be on the wrong track · to be utterly confounded to be at a loss what to do next Orada öyle bir pot kırdın ki ne yapsan düzeltemezsin. You made such a faux pas over there that you'll never be able to repair the damage. · Ne yapıyorsun yahu, sen bugün pusulayı şaşırdın galiba. What's wrong with you today, fella. You must have lost your bearings. · Her şeyini bir anda yitiren yaşlı adam pusulayı şaşırdı. The old man (who lost everything in a very short while) was at a loss what to do. 189 püf noktası Also seen as · işin püf noktası · bir işin püf noktası [the sound of air blown from the mouth] point · the most important, as well as the most delicate part (of a matter) · the key or crucial point (about sth) Kek yapmanın püf noktası içine konulan malzemelerin iyi karıştırılmasıdır. The most important part of cake making is the proper mixing of the ingredients as you put them in. color bar color bar color bar color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter R The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning Comments and Examples rafa koymak/ kaldırmak to put on a shelf to shelve (sth), to put (sth) aside Kitap yazma işini şimdilik rafa koyduk, ileride yeniden o konuya döneceğiz. We've shelved writing the book for now, we'll return to the subject again in the future. rahat (rahatlık) batmak to sink peace and quiet (for no apparent reason) to give up an Neden başka şehre gidip sürüneceksin. Burada iyi evin, iyi bir işin var. Rahat mı 190 easy life or a comfortable position for a different and lesspleasant life/position to be 'a glutton for punishment' battı. Why are you going to another city to live a miserable life. Here you have a nice home and a good job. Are you a glutton for punishment. rahat yüzü görmemek to not see peace and quiet face to be constantly plagued by troubles, not to have a moment's peace Ne gençliğinde ne de yaşlılığında rahat yüzü gördü. Neither in her youth nor in her old age did she ever have a moment's peace. rahatına bakmak to look to (your) peace and quiet to only look after one's own comfort Rahatına bakar, en yakınlarını bile düşünmez o. She's only out for herself, she doesn't even think of her closest friends. rahmet okutmak to cause to read God's mercy to rue the day that sb left Bu yeni patron Ahmet Bey'e rahmet okuttu. This new boss has made us rue the day that Ahmet Bey left. rahmetli olmak to be with God's mercy to die Geçen yıl rahmetli oldu dayım. My uncle died last year. to put (sth) right, to put (sth) on the right track, to make (sth) run Genç karı koca uzun zaman konuştuktan sonra sorunlarını çözüp ilişkilerini rayına oturttular. After they talked things over rayına oturmak to sit down on a railway track 191 renk vermemek to not give color (to not make ob(rengini belli vious color) etmemek) smoothly for a long time, the young married couple solved their problems and got their relationship back on the right track. 1. to feign ignorance 2. to hide one's thoughts and feelings (from another), to not show one's 'true colors' 1. Annem vazoyu kimin kırdığını bilip bilmediğimizi sorunca kardeşim hiç renk vermedi. When my mother asked if we knew who broke the vase, my brother feigned ignorance. 2. Bildiği halde hiç renk vermedi. Although he knew [about it], he hid his feelings. renkten renge girmek to enter from color to color for sb to flush/blush deeply (due to embarrassment) Öğretmen azarlayınca renkten renge gireriz. When the teacher reproves us, we blush from embarrassment. [-da/-de] rol oynamak to play a role · to have a role in, play a part in · to put on an act, pretend, playact Çocuğun başarısında aile önemli rol oynar. The family plays an important role in a child's success [in life]. to be completely unaware of, not to notice in any way whatsoever · Hırsız içeri girerken bekçinin ruhu bile duymamış. The watchmen was totally unaware when the thief entered [the premises]. · Yüz dirhem yerine doksan dirhem sun- ruhu (bile) duy- not to hear (even) spirit mamak 192 san, kimin ruhu duyar. Who's going to notice [the difference] -- whether you give 100 drachma or 90. to die Saat tam onda ruhunu teslim etti, yanında ben vardım. She died at exactly ten o'clock, I was by her side. rüyasında görse to not tire if one sees it in one's hayra yormadreams mak to not dream that sth so wonderful could happen (to sb) Piyangodan bana bu kadar çok paranın çıkacağını rüyamda görsem hayra yormazdım. Bak şu işe sen. I could never have dreamed that I'd win so much money in the lottery. And look at me now. the wind will come, the holes plugged to take precautions, to be prepared to meet trouble Çok düşünceli biridir, her şeyi hesaplar, rüzgar gelebilecek deliklerin hepsini tıkamıştır, hiç merak etmeyin. She's a very careful person. She takes everything into account, she'll be very well prepared -you needn't at all. ruhunu teslim etmek rüzgar gelecek delikleri tıkamak (for) the spirit to be delivered color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter S The Turkish The Literal Eng- The 'Plain' Comments and Examples 193 lish Meaning English Meaning Saatler olsun. See sıhhatler olsun. saç saça (baş başa) hair to hair (head to head) to begin to fight with each other, to rough up each other saçma sapan (konuşmak) (to talk) nonsense slingshot · very absurd Örnegin, birçok Batı · (to talk) ülkesinde çok satan kitanonsense plar listesinde bir sürü saçma sapan kitaplar vardır. For example, in many western countries there are a lot of absurd books that reach the bestseller lists. sağ ol be alive [informal way to say] Thank you. May be used as shown. Sağlık olsun. · Let/may there be good health... · As long as there's good health… · Oh, never mind, not to worry. · It's OK, don't worry about it. Yarışmayı hemen hemen kazanmıştım. Sağlık olsun. I almost won the contest, but never mind, it's all right. [a/e] sahip çıkmak for an owner to go out 1. to claim to be the owner of (sth) claim (sth) (that one has no right to claim) 2. to attend to see to look after (sb) · Çocuğuna sahip çık. Get your child under control. · Avrupa PKK'ya sahip çıkınca terör başladı. 194 3. to get (sb/sth) under control 4. to support, back, help (sb/sth) 1. sakınca yoksa 2. sakınca var 1. if there is no ob- 1.if you don't May be used as shown. jection mind 2. there is objec2. I do mind tion saman altından su yürütmek for water to walk under the straw · be as sly as a fox extremely crafty and devious · work (secretly) towards a goal Metin Bey yıllarca saman altından su yürütüp gizli işler yaptı ve kısa zamanda çok zengin oldu. Metin Bey worked slyly for years on secret projects and then he became rich in a short time. sarı çizmeli Mehmet Ağa yellow-booted Mehmet Ağa · an unknown person just anybody a nobody · Joe Bloggs Joe Blow Joe Doaks John Doe Kim olduğu, ne olduğu doğru dürüst bilinmeyen bir kişiden söz ederken, 'sarı çizmeli Mehmet Ağa' deyimini kullanırız. We use this idiom, 'yellowbooted Mehmet Ağa' when talking about a person that we don't really know much about (...it is not really known 'who he is', 'what he is'). See The Best of the Idiom Stories too. sarmaş dolaş (olmak) Note sarmaş has no (to be) … wander · (to be) locked in close embrace · (to be) on Cem Adler, gazetecilere yanak yanağa ve sarmaş dolaş pozlar vermekten de çekinmedi. Cem Adler was on very friendly terms 195 independent meaning except in this idiom. very friendly terms with the newspaper reporters, and didn't avoid giving [camera] poses. in its shadow thanks to Ali'nin sayesinde işi bitirdik. Thanks to Ali we finished the job. sefa/safa geldin(iz) you come pleasant Welcome... Hoş geldin, sefa geldin. Gemi benim değil, senindir. Welcome, welcome. The boat's not mine, consider it to be yours. sen bilirsin you (habitually) know · as you wish/like · as you will · OK, if that's what you think is right, I leave it up to you. sayesinde Note This idiom means almost the same as bu sayede and o sayede. 1. senet sepet 2. senetsiz sepetsiz ses çıkarmamak 1. documentary proof basket 2. lack of documentary proof basket to not bring out voice (sth) which has no written certification whatsoever · to not raise an objection 196 · to keep quiet, not to say anything ses çıkarmak to bring out voice · to voice an opinion · to say sth Ses çıkaran olmadı. Nobody objected. (There wasn't anyone who raised a voice.) sessiz sedasız quiet unvoiced · quiet and retiring · quietly and unobtrusively Sedef Erbil'den sessiz sedasız boşanan Mehmet Ali Erbil'in eşine nafaka olarak 100 bin dolar ve Beylikdüzü'nde de iki ev verdiği iddia edildi. It's claimed that (famed Turkish entertainer) Mehmet Ali Erbil (who was divorced quietly and unobtrusively from Sedef Erbil) gave his wife 100 thousand dollars alimony and two houses in Beylikdüzü (a 'rich and famous' residential area of İstanbul). Sıhhatler olsun. Let there be healths. · I hope it does you good. · I hope you enjoy it. · Note this is most often said to sb who has just had a bath or a haircut. Saç tıraşın çok güzel olmuş, hangi berber'de oldun, sıhhatler olsun. You've got a very nice haircut. Which barber did it. I hope you enjoy it. sıkı fıkı close ... intimate sıkı tutmak to hold tightly · to do sth with scrup- Also seen as saatler olsun.. İşimizi sıkı tutalım, sonra başımız ağrımasın. Let's 197 ulous care · to hold tightly do this job meticulously, then we won't have any headaches later. sınıfta çakmak (kalmak) to drive a nail (remain) in class (for a student) to fail a class, fail a grade sıra sende (bende, etc.) and you (me, etc.) line/queue It's your (my, May be used as shown. etc.) turn, now. sıradan from line/queue ordinary, middling, mediocre, run-of-themill sırası gelmişken while it has come to the line/queue by the way Sırtında yumurta küfesi yok ya. There's no egg You can't basket behind him. depend on him he'll break his word (or change his tack) as it suits him. Şimdi de tersini söylüyor, sırtında yumurta küfesi yok ya. Now he's saying the reverse [of what he said before], he breaks his word whenever it suits him. [-a/-e] sırtını dayamak to lean the back against sth Sırtını Dubaili şeyhe dayadı. She relies on the protection of a sheik from Dubai. sidik yarıştırmak to have a urine to try to emurace, a pissing con- late sb who is test above your station Also seen as Arkasında yumurta küfesi yok ya. This is an off-color id- to rely on the protection of sb/sth Dün gece çok sıradan bir film gördük. We saw a very mediocre film last night. Durumuna bakmadan onunla sidik yarıştırıyorsun, o koskoca bir işyerinin sahibi sense maaşlı bir elemansın. 198 iom. Without considering the situation you are trying to emulate her but she's the owner of a very large business and you're just a salaried employee. Similar to at koşturmak – which is not off-color. Sikimden asağa, Kasımpaşa. Below my penis, Kasimpaşa (a section of İstanbul). I don't give a May be used as shown. shit. This is an off-color idiom sinek avlamak to hunt (shoot) a kill time fly (mosquito/gnat) twiddle one's thumbs (forced) to pass time idly (due to lack of employment, etc.) Sigara yasağı yüzünden restoranlar sinek avlıyor. Due to 'No Smoking' law (cigarette prohibition) restaurants are losing business (...are forced to pass time idly). sitem etmek to [do] reproach to reproach See example sentence at eli değmek. soluğu (bir yerde) almak to take breath (at a place) to get to a place in no time flat Soluğu İspanya yakasında aldı. She reached the Spanish border in no time flat. soluk almak to take a breath · to breathe to inhale · to take a breather, rest See example sentence at cami/minare yıkılmış, etc. son derece last degree extremely Bu adam son derece cimriydi. This man was very very stingy. son gülen iyi the last laugher, he who May be used as shown. 199 güler laughs good laughs last, laughs best sonradan görme seeing/seen subsequently · a person who acts with extreme pride after achieving (undeserved) wealth or rank · a person who has suddenly risen to a higher economic status but has not gained social acceptance of others in that class (nouveau riche) soylu soplu with lineage with clan sb from a well-known, wellestablished family sövüp saymak to curse and to count to swear violently (at) (each other) söz düşmemek See laf/söz düsmemek. söz (lafını) etmek to make/do remark · to talk about sb/sth · to gossip Note This idiom is also sometimes seen as sonradan görmüş. · Dikkat et, ben senin gibi sonradan görme değilim, öyle olur olmaz şeyleri alamam. Be careful, I'm not 'newly rich' like you, I can't buy whatever I please (...just any old things). · Sonradan görme olduğu, özenti içinde olmasından anlaşılıyor. Someone who is nouveau riche is recognizable from his/her (failed) attempts to imitate his/her 'superiors'. Saygısız biriydi herkese sövüp sayıp gitti. He was a very disrespectful person he swore at everyone and then he left. · Az önce senin lafını ediyor, nerelerde kaldı, niye buralara uğramaz oldu, 200 söz konusu (unfavorably about sb) diyorduk. We were just talking about you we were wondering where you were, why you hadn't visited hereabouts... · Also see example at sarı çizmeli Mehmet Ağa. word subject · a person, thing, topic being talked about · a person, thing, topic under discussion · a topic for discussion · as mentioned, in question, that kind of, such... Bu iddialar çok çirkin diye konuştu. These accusations are shameful [and malicious]. · 1991'de Irak'ın Kuveyt'e girmesi üzerine ABD'nin Irak'a müdahalesi, uluslararası topluluk tarafından büyük destek görmüştü. Ancak 12 yıl sonra böyle bir destek söz konusu değil. In 1991 when Iraq invaded Kuwait, the American intervention (against Iraq) had a lot of support by the international community. But, 12 years later, there wasn't such support. to not turn from See Also seen as sözkonusu. sözünden 201 dönmemek your word sözünü yerine getirmek. sözünü kesmek to cut the word to stop Hoca adamın sözünü kespeaking in serek yanından ayrılmış. mid-sentence The teacher left the man's side, cutting him off in midsentence. sözünü tutmak to hold your word See sözünü yerine getirmek. sözünü yerine to bring your word to a place getirmek to keep one's word John bey'e, Donna'ya bir kardeş gibi bakacağıma söz verdim. O sözümü yerine getiriyorum. I promised Mr. John that I'd look after Donna like she was a sister. I'm keeping my word on it. su gibi like water... easily, smoothly, fluently... su gibi berrak as clear as water · Just beauti- May be used as shown. ful.. · Perfect, ideal, wonderful... su gibi bilmek to know like water to know sth perfectly, have sth down pat su yüzüne çıkmak/ çıkarmak for water to get out to surface, to on the face become apparent, to come to light 202 Meanwhile, the latest developments show that a spat has surfaced between the US and Europe. suç işlemek to perform an offence sudan çıkmış they go out of wabalığa döndü- ter and turn into fish ler to commit an offence/ crime Bu rahatsız edici durum şimdi suç işlenmiş durumuna düşmüştür. This disturbing situation has now become a criminal situation. · to be in a daze · not to know what to do or which way to turn İranlılar, Antalya'ya gelince şaşıp kaldılar. Sudan çıkmış balığa döndüler. When (male tourist) Iranians come to Antalya, they are bewildered. They don't know what to do or which way to turn. suya düşmek to fall to the water to fail, come to nothing Acil tezkere suya düşüyor. Irak'a asker gönderme konusunda kamuoyunda yoğunlaşan tepkiler, hükümeti geri adım atmaya zorladı. [Hope for the] swift 'parliamentary approval' comes to nothing. The [Turkish] government was forced to take a step back, due to intense reac-tions in public opinion about the subject of sending [Turkish] soldiers to Iraq. süklüm püklüm …… · looking [very] guilty · [in] a downcast or hangdog · Kapıyı vurdu, yavaşça açıp süklüm püklüm içeri girdi. He knocked on the door, slowly opened it and entered looking very guilty. Note both these words 203 are meaningless, except in this idiom... süsleyip püslemek also süslü püslü to decorate and ... Note püslemek and püslü are meaningless except in these phrases. manner · Camı kıran çocuk süklüm püklüm müdürün huzuruna çıktı. The boy who broke the window glass presented himself to the principal in a hang-dog manner. · to adorn with great care, to dress in a remarkable and striking manner · elaborately dressed · ornamented, decorated · needless, worthless, excessive adornment El ele verip kızcağızı süsleyip püsledik. We joined forces and dolled up our daughter 'fit to kill'. color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter Ş The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning Comments and Examples şafak atmak to throw dawn · for the truth to suddenly dawn on (sb) · (for Turkish enlisted- · Ödevi yarına kadar bitirmem gerektiğini hatırlayınca bende şafak attı. It finally dawned on me when I remembered that I had to finish my homework by tomorrow. 204 rank soldiers it means) ‘after today'… · Soru Askerliğin ne zaman bitiyor. Cevap Şafak attı 105. Question When is your military duty finishing. Answer After today, [only] 105 days remain. (iş) şaka götürmemek (for work) to not bring joke (for sth) to Tabanca şaka götürbe 'no jok- mez. En küçük bir ing matter' dikkatsizlik ölümle sonuçlanabilir. A gun is no joking matter. With the smallest carelessness it can result in death. şart… condition/situation... Conveys the meaning that sth 'must be'… Seninle konuşmamız şart. Gitmen şart mı. We must [have a] talk. Must you [really] go. şaşı, çakır demektense kör de kurtul to escape (saying) cross-eyed and/or blind, to prefer (saying) grayish-blue (eyes) to avoid speaking the truth openly, to 'beat around the bush', to speak 'indirectly' instead of truthfully Anladım, bu adamı begenmiyorsun. Şaşı, çakır demektense kör de kurtul. I understand, you don't like this man. You are speaking indirectly to avoid the truth. Şerrine lanet. Damn to his wickedness. I want May be used as shown. nothing to do with that devil. [He's sb 205 to avoid like the plague.] to dress Satan oppo- be very şeytana külâhı (papucu/pabucu) site in a conical hat cunning, (pair of shoes) make sb ters giydirmek 'fall for' or believe sth (that's not true) be clever enough to outwit the devil himself Öyle kurnaz, öyle beceriklidir ki şeytana pabucu ters giydirir. He's that cunning, he's that clever that he could outwit the devil himself. şeytana uymak to suit the devil to stray from the correct path, to let the devil get the better of you, to yield to temptation Şeytana uyup bir hata yaptım, lütfen affedin. Bir daha yapmayacağım. I let the devil tempt me and I made a mistake, please forgive (me). I won't do it again. şeytanın art ayağı (kıç/bacağı) Satan's back foot (buttocks/leg) a mischief maker who, at the same time, is very clever Bu çocuk şeytanın art ayağı, her türlü kurnazlıkları biliyor. This child is mischievous and clever, he knows all kinds of cunning trickery. şeytan tüyü (bulunmak) (to have) a Satan feather (to have) a 'certain sth' that makes one irresistibly attractive Sensiz yapamıyorum. Sen yanımda olmadıkça kendimi yapayalnız hissediyorum. Şeytan tüyü var sanki sende. I 206 şıp diye saying şıp Note şıp has no meaning except in this idiom. şimşekleri (yıldı- to pull on a lightening flash rımları) (thunderbolt) üstüne/üzerine çekmek to others can't do (this) without you. Each time you are not by my side, I feel completely alone. It's as if you were irresistibly attractive (to me). instantly in an instant · Ne zaman güzel bir kadınla iki çift laf etmeye kalkışsam karım şıp diye damlar da... Whenever I try to have a word or two with a pretty woman, my wife instantly appears out of nowhere. · Also see hayrete düşmek. to attract strong criticism Böyle yaparsan, üyeleri kızdırır, şimşekleri üstüne çekersin. Başka bir yol tut, sen toplantıda en son konuş. If you do (it) like that, it will anger the members and you'll attract a lot of criticism. Choose a different tack [for now], and then you (can) bring it up at the meeting. the sting of suspicion, (a) gnawing doubt İmtihan pek de kötü geçmemişti ama, yine de içimi kemiren bir şüphe kurdu vardı. The exam wasn't really that bad, but there was still a gnawing doubt Also see yıldırımları üstüne çekmek. şüphe kurdu he/she/it set up doubt 207 that nibbled [at me]. color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter T The Turkish The Literal The 'Plain' English English MeanMeaning ing Comments and Examples tabanları yağlamak to oil the sole · to get ready to hoof it a long way · to run fast, run like anything to make tracks, beat it Tabanları yağlayalım, gideceğimiz yer uzak, zamanımız az. Let's make tracks. Our destination (the place that we'll go to) is far and we don't have much time (our time is little). [-ın, -in, -un, -ün] tadını çıkarmak to remove the flavor from · to make the most of · to get the utmost enjoyment out of (sth) · to luxuriate in (sth) · Yirmi yaşındaki Cem Adler, Başınç yok, stres yok diyerek, boşanmanın tadını çıkardığını söyledi. Saying, I don't have any pressure or stress, twentyyear-old Cem Adler [Bulent Ersoy's former toy-boy 'husband'] explained that he's trying to make the most of his divorce. · See another example sentence at gözden kaçmak. [-ın, -in, -un, -ün] tadını kaçırmak to let flavor escape to spoil (sth), cast a damper on (sth) Plakların birini kaldırıp birini koyuyordu, sesler beynimizde zonkluyordu dayanamayıp, Yeter. dedim, tadını iyice kaçırdın. Someone was removing the records and someone else was putting them back on the noise was making my brain throb with pain I couldn't stand it 208 anymore, so I said, Enough, you're ruining everything. tahsil etmek to make/do education 1. be educated, get an education, to study 2. with a preceding [-ı/ -i/-u/-ü] suffix study a subject 3. with a preceding [-ı/ -i/-u/-ü] suffix -- collect or recover (money or taxes) talep etmek to make/do wanting to want, demand, require, request tamtakır tamtakır kuru bakır tamtakır kırmızı bakır completely empty, a completely empty dry copper, completely empty red copper completely empty · Sandığın içi tamtakır kuru bakırdı, belli ki açmış, içindekileri alıp götürmüşlerdi. The inside of the trunk was completely empty, it was obvious that it had been opened and the contents had been taken away/removed. · Tamtakır kırmızı bakır bir yazlıkta tatil geçirmek insana zevk vermez. It's no fun to have a vacation in a completely empty summer cottage. to be able to run rings around (sb), to be far superior than (sb) Mankenlere taş çıkarttı. Törene hayli çekici bir elbiseyle gelen Serena, sporcudan çok bir mankene benziyordu. [-a/-e] to cause to taş çıkarmak remove (çıkartmak) stone Onbir milyar dolarlık hortumun sadece 235 milyon doları tahsil edilebildi... Of the eleven billion dollarsworth that was embezzled only 235 million dollars can be recovered... 209 Headline She's better than the fashion models. (Pro Tennis star) Serena (Williams) who came to the ceremony wearing a very attractive dress, looked very much the fashion model compared with the other players. taş kesilmek to cut stone to be dumbfounded Salonun içinde kimse kımıldayamadı. Hepsi olduğu yerde taş kesildi. No one in the salon could make a move. Everyone in the place was dumbfounded. tek başına to a single head · on one's/its own, by one's self alone · apart, at a distance from other people/things Sezer tek başına ana muhalefet partisi gibi. Cumhurbaşkanı'nın Orman Yasası'nı ikinci defa veto etmesi siyasi havayı iyice gerdi. (Turkish President) Sezer is like a main opposition party all by himself. The President's vetoing of the Forests Bill for the second time has caused the political air to be rather tense. tekeden süt çıkarmak to remove milk from a billy goat to do the [seemingly] impossible, to be very skillful in getting what one wants Ustam, tekeden bile süt çıkarır. My master-craftsman can do the impossible. (...even get milk from a billy goat.) 1. an order that comes from a high official -one of the 'big Tepeden inme bir emirle müdürün tayini durduruldu. His appointment to manager was stopped by an tepeden inme don't send from a hill or sending from a hill 210 guns' 2. very sudden and unexpected order from on high. tepesi atmak to throw at the hill to lose one's temper, blow one's stack Asabi okurları faks ve telefon yağdırdı. Tepemiz atıyor. They are blowing their stacks at us. tercih etmek to make/do preference · [-ı/-i/-u/-ü] -to prefer · [-ı/-i/-u/ -ü] [-a/-e] -- to prefer (one) to (another) Otel ve tatil köyü yöneticileri 'Türklerin çoğu Türk yemeklerini tercih ediyor. Hatta tatile geldiklerinde açık büfede kuru fasulye görmeyince bizimle tartışanlar oldu' diyor. Hotel and vacationvillage managers say, 'The majority of Turks prefer Turkish food. Furthermore, when they are on vacation and when they don't see [stewed] dried beans in the open buffet, they give us a hard time (...they become disputers with us). tereciye tere satmak to sell cress · to try to eduto a seller of cate sb who is cress more educated than oneself · to try to teach one's grandmother to suck eggs Tereciye tere satma. Ben bu teknik bilgileri senden daha iyi biliyorum. Don't try to tell me. I have more technical knowledge than you do (on this subject). tespit etmek/ yapmak to do/make a fixing · Böbrek hastası farelere içirilen az miktarda alkolün böbreklere ne yararı ne de zararı olduğu · to fix/make (sth) fast · to fix/set (prices) 211 · to set (a bone) · to establish, determine · to determine the nature (of a crime, a situation) tıkırı yerinde for ... to be in place olmak Note tıkırı has no on its own. tespit edildi. It has been determined that consumption of a small amount of alcohol is neither beneficial nor harmful to the kidneys of (already) kidney-diseased mice. · See another example sentence at üslup (yönünden). to be in a good position financially to be earning good money tıkırı yolunda/yerinde ... is in road without worries Ali Babacan'ın Erkenden doing well, evime gidip bol bol yemek prospering yiyorum dediğini duyan vatandaşlar, Onun tıkırı yerinde, bir de bizi görsün, açlıktan nefesimiz kokuyor diye konuştular. The [poverty-stricken] citizens who heard that [Minister of State] Ali Babacan said, I'm coming home early and eating a large meal, commented that, He's doing very well, but let him come meet and talk with us once, and smell the hunger on our breath. tıkırı yolunda gitmek for ... to go for sb's worries (be) on road to vanish for sb to do well, prosper for sb to be financially secure 212 tıklım tıklım (dolu) ... ... extremely crowded Kuşadası'nın plajları tıklım tıklım. Kuşadası's beaches are extremely crowded. 1. to patter, move with pattering footsteps 2. to go whether one wants to or not 3. to do sth whether one likes it or not Şimdi tıpış tıpış birliğine gidecek ve çakı gibi asker olacak. Now he'll do his military service whether he likes it or not and become a dutiful and obedient soldier. [...go to his military-unit whether he likes it or not and become a very active and alert soldier.] Borsa konusunda sen onun tırnağı bile olamazsın. On the subject of the stock market, you can't compare favorably with him. Note tıklım has no meaning except in this idiom. tıpış tıpış git- to go ... ... mek Note tıpış tıpış only has meaning when used in this idiom. tırıl tırıl gauzy, filmy tırnağı bile olamamak to not even be the fingernail (for sb) to be very inferior to sb else to be nothing compared to another tirit gibi like toast soaked in meat gravy or sugary syrup old and enfeebled 'as old as the hills' topa tutmak to hold to a ball · to bombard (someplace) with cannon/ artillery fire · to blast, berate, denounce, strongly and angrily criticize DYP lideri Mehmet Ağar, Çukurova'da AKP'yi topa tuttu. 213 light into sb/sth toprağı bol olsun Let the earth be plentiful. May he/she rest Yine de acılarını paylaşıin peace (said of yorum. Toprağı bol olsun. a non-Muslim). Once again I'm sharing their [ie., Sweden's] pain. May she rest in peace. Written of assassinated Swedish Foreign Minister Lindh. toprak doyursun gözünü See gözünü toprak doyursun. Toz ol. Be dust. · Beat it. · Get lost. · Get outta here. · Take a hike. · Piss off. May be used as shown. or as follows Bahçe kapısının önünden üçü de toz olmuştu. The were three [of them] at the garden gate, and they just disappeared. tozu dumana katmak [sometimes shortened to tozu dumana or just tozduman] to remain in dust [and smoke], clouded by dust [and smoke] · to be covered in a thick cloud of dust · to raise a cloud of dust · to make or be in an uproar · to raise a ruckus Ecevit, hükümetin kaderini ikinci turun sonucuna bağladı. Ankara'yı tozu dumana kattı. Prime Minister Ecevit's government's future is tied to the second voting cycle. Ankara is in an uproar. turnayı gözünden vurmak to hit the crane from the eye · to manage to acquire sth very valuable · to have a business success · to be lucky · Also see meanings at durdu durdu (da). · En iyisini elde ettik turnayı gözünden vurduk. We got the best one, we were lucky. · Also see example sentence at durdu durdu (da). tutunacak (not to (not to have) sth Zavallı kadıncağız ne 214 dalı (olmamak) (yok) have) a branch to hold onto or sb you can rely on yapsın. Tutunacak dalı yok. What may be done for the poor dear woman. She hasn't anyone she can rely on. tuz biber ekmek See üstüne (üzerine) tuz biber ekmek. tuzla buz olmak to be ice with salt · to be smashed to smithereens smashed to bits · to be utterly routed Cezaevlerindeki kadın nüfusu patladı. Geçen yılki tahminlerimiz tuzla buz oldu. The female population in prisons (specifically) has exploded. Last year (specifically), our estimates were smashed to bits. tuzu kuru The salt [is] dry. · well off, in easy circumstances · without worries · (sb) who has nothing to worry about financially · (sb) who has nothing to worry about Onlar terörün vahşetini bilmiyordu. Tuzları kuruydu. They were not aware of the brutality of terror. They had nothing to worry about. Türkün aklı the thought A Turkish personradan ge- of a Turkish son acts first, person thinks of the lir(miş) comes later consequences later a Turk doesn't think about the consequences of an A self-deprecating Turkish witticism that may be used as shown. 215 action until it's too late a Turk doesn't plan ahead, doesn't plan for contingencies. · tüyleri diken diken olmak · tüyleri ürpermek · (for) feather to be straight up · (for) feather to shudder · for one's hair to stand on end · to get goose pimples · to shudder Depremin olduğu günü düşündükçe tüylerim diken diken oluyor. Every time I think of the day we had the earthquake, I get goose pimples. color bar color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter U The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning Comments and Examples ucuz atlatmak/kurtulmak to jump/escape cheap to escape (from a tight or dangerous situation) with little or no harm, to get off lightly · Bu trafik kazasını ucuz atlattık, çünkü o kalabalıkta pek çok insanı da çiğneyebilirdik. We got off lightly from the traffic accident, because we could have run over a lot of people in that crowd. · Şimdi sen palavrayı bırak. Bu patırtıdan ucuz kurtulmak istersen, burada durma, pabuçları giy, uzaklaş. Cut the crap right now. If you want to escape this brawl with no harm done, don't stick around, put your shoes on, and beat it. to owe John beyin bilgisayarlık uçan kuşa borcu to be in debt 216 (borçlu) olmak (var) to a flying bird uçan kuştan me- to hope for det/imdad/imdat aid from a flying bird ummak uma uma döndük muma hoping, hoping we turned into wax money to (almost) everybody bürosunu açmadan önce uçan kuşa borcu vardı. Damadının arkadaşından bile borç almıştı. Before Mr. John opened his computer office, he owed money to almost everybody. He even borrowed money from his son-in-law's friend. to be willing to accept help from absolutely anyone who offers it İki yıldır işsiz. İş bulmak için uçan kuştan