must have heard of my name and meeting you so conveniently, I thought you might admit me. You will not find Dr. Jekyll he is from home, replied Mr. Hyde, blowing in the key. And then suddenly, but still without looking up, How did you know me. he asked. On your side, said Mr. Utterson will you do me a favour. With pleasure, replied the other. What shall it be. Will you let me see your face. asked the lawyer. Mr. Hyde appeared to hesitate, and then, as if upon some sudden reflection, fronted about with an air of defiance and the pair stared at each other pretty fixedly for a few seconds. Now I shall know you again, said Mr. Utterson. It may be useful. Yes, returned Mr. Hyde, It is as well we have met and apropos, you should have my address. And he gave a number of a street in Soho. Good God. thought Mr. Utterson, can he, too, have been thinking of the will. But he kept his feelings to himself and only grunted in acknowledgment of the address. And now, said the other, how did you know me. By description, was the reply. Whose description. We have common friends, said Mr. Utterson. Common friends, echoed Mr. Hyde, a little hoarsely. Who are they. Jekyll, for instance, said the lawyer. He never told you, cried Mr. Hyde, with a flush of anger. I did not think you would have lied. Come, said Mr. Utterson, that is not fitting language. The other snarled aloud into a savage laugh and the next moment, with extraordinary quickness, he had unlocked the door and disappeared into the house. The lawyer stood awhile when Mr. Hyde had left him, the picture of disquietude. Then he began slowly to mount the street, pausing every step or two and putting his hand to his brow like a man in mental perplexity. The problem he was thus debating as he walked, was one of a class that is rarely solved. Mr. Hyde was pale and dwarfish, he gave an impression of deformity without any nameable malformation, he had a displeasing smile, he had borne himself to the lawyer with a sort of murderous mixture of timidity and boldness, and he spoke with a husky, whispering and somewhat broken voice all these were points against him, but not all of these together could explain the hitherto unknown disgust, loathing and fear with which Mr. Utterson regarded him. There must be something else, said the perplexed gentleman. There is something more, if I could find a name for it. God bless me, the man seems hardly human. Something troglodytic, shall we say. or can it be the old story of Dr. Fell. or is it the mere radiance of a foul soul that thus transpires through, and transfigures, its clay continent. The last, I think for, O my poor old Harry Jekyll, if ever I read Satan's signature upon a face, it is on that of your new friend. Round the corner from the by-street, there was a square of ancient, handsome houses, now for the most part decayed from their high estate and let in flats and chambers to all sorts and conditions of men map-engravers, architects, shady lawyers and the agents of obscure enterprises. One house, however, second from the corner, was still occupied entire and at the door of this, which wore a great air of wealth and comfort, though it was now plunged in darkness except for the fanlight, Mr. Utterson stopped and knocked. A well-dressed, elderly servant opened the door. asked the lawyer. I will see, Mr. Utterson, said Poole, admitting the visitor, as he spoke, into a large, low-roofed, comfortable hall paved with flags, warmed (after the fashion of a country house) by a bright, open fire, and furnished with costly cabinets of oak. Will you wait here by the fire, sir. or shall I give you a light in the diningroom. Here, thank you, said the lawyer, and he drew near and leaned on the tall fender. This hall, in which he was now left alone, was a pet fancy of his friend the doctor's and Utterson himself was wont to speak of it as the pleasantest room in London. But tonight there was a shudder in his blood the face of Hyde sat heavy on his memory he felt (what was rare with him) a nausea and distaste of life and in the gloom of his spirits, he seemed to read a menace in the flickering of the firelight on the polished cabinets and the uneasy starting of the shadow on the roof. He was ashamed of his relief, when Poole presently returned to announce that Dr. Jekyll was gone out. I saw Mr. Hyde go in by the old dissecting room, Poole, he said. Is that right, when Dr. Jekyll is from home. Quite right, Mr. Utterson, sir, replied the servant. Mr. Hyde has a key. Your master seems to repose a great deal of trust in that young man, Poole, resumed the other musingly. Yes, sir, he does indeed, said Poole. We have all orders to obey him. I do not think I ever met Mr. Hyde. asked Utterson. O, dear no, sir. He never dines here, replied the butler. Indeed we see very little of him on this side of the house he mostly comes and goes by the laboratory. Well, good-night, Poole. Good-night, Mr. Utterson. And the lawyer set out homeward with a very heavy heart. Poor Harry Jekyll, he thought, my mind misgives me he is in deep waters. He was wild when he was young a long while ago to be sure but in the law of God, there is no statute of limitations. And the lawyer, scared by the thought, brooded awhile on his own past, groping in all the corners of memory, least by chance some Jack-in-the-Box of an old iniquity should leap to light there. His past was fairly blameless few men could read the rolls of their life with less apprehension yet he was humbled to the dust by the many ill things he had done, and raised up again into a sober and fearful gratitude by the many he had come so near to doing yet avoided. And then by a return on his former subject, he conceived a spark of hope. This Master Hyde, if he were studied, thought he, must have secrets of his own black secrets, by the look of him secrets compared to which poor Jekyll's worst would be like sunshine. Things cannot continue as they are. It turns me cold to think of this creature stealing like a thief to Harry's bedside poor Harry, what a wakening. And the danger of it for if this Hyde suspects the existence of the will, he may grow impatient to inherit. For once more he saw before his mind's eye, as clear as transparency, the strange clauses of the will. This was no new arrangement, but a thing that had befallen many scores of times. Where Utterson was liked, he was liked well. Hosts loved to detain the dry lawyer, when the light-hearted and loose-tongued had already their foot on the threshold they liked to sit a while in his unobtrusive company, practising for solitude, sobering their minds in the man's rich silence after the expense and strain of gaiety. To this rule, Dr. Jekyll was no exception and as he now sat on the opposite side of the fire –a large, wellmade, smooth-faced man of fifty, with something of a stylish cast perhaps, but every mark of capacity and kindness– you could see by his looks that he cherished for Mr. Utterson a sincere and warm affection. I have been wanting to speak to you, Jekyll, began the latter. You know that will of yours. A close observer might have gathered that the topic was distasteful but the doctor carried it off gaily. My poor Utterson, said he, you are unfortunate in such a client. I never saw a man so distressed as you were by my will unless it were that hide-bound pedant, Lanyon, at what he called my scientific heresies. O, I know he's a good fellow –you needn't frown– an excellent fellow, and I always mean to see more of him but a hide-bound pedant for all that an ignorant, blatant pedant. I was never more disappointed in any man than Lanyon. You know I never approved of it, pursued Utterson, ruthlessly disregarding the fresh topic. My will. Yes, certainly, I know that, said the doctor, a trifle sharply. You have told me so. Well, I tell you so again, continued the lawyer. I have been learning something of young Hyde. The large handsome face of Dr. Jekyll grew pale to the very lips, and there came a blackness about his eyes. I do not care to hear more, said he. This is a matter I thought we had agreed to drop. What I heard was abominable, said Utterson. It can make no change. You do not understand my position, returned the doctor, with a certain incoherency of manner. I am painfully situated, Utterson my position is a very strange –a very strange one. It is one of those affairs that cannot be mended by talking. Jekyll, said Utterson, you know me I am a man to be trusted. Make a clean breast of this in confidence and I make no doubt I can get you out of it. My good Utterson, said the doctor, this is very good of you, this is downright good of you, and I cannot find words to thank you in. I believe you fully I would trust you before any man alive, ay, before myself, if I could make the choice but indeed it isn't what you fancy it is not as bad as that and just to put your good heart at rest, I will tell you one thing the moment I choose, I can be rid of Mr. Hyde. I give you my hand upon that and I thank you again and again and I will just add one little word, Utterson, that I'm sure you'll take in good part this is a private matter, and I beg of you to let it sleep. Utterson reflected a little, looking in the fire. I have no doubt you are perfectly right, he said at last, getting to his feet. Well, but since we have touched upon this business, and for the last time I hope, continued the doctor, there is one point I should like you to understand. I have really a very great interest in poor Hyde. I know you have seen him he told me so and I fear he was rude. But I do sincerely take a great, a very great interest in that young man and if I am taken away, Utterson, I wish you to promise me that you will bear with him and get his rights for him. I think you would, if you knew all and it would be a weight off my mind if you would promise. I can't pretend that I shall ever like him, said the lawyer. I don't ask that, pleaded Jekyll, laying his hand upon the other's arm I only ask for justice I only ask you to help him for my sake, when I am no longer here. Utterson heaved an irrepressible sigh. Well, said he, I promise. The details were few and startling. A maid servant living alone in a house not far from the river, had gone upstairs to bed about eleven. Although a fog rolled over the city in the small hours, the early part of the night was cloudless, and the lane, which the maid's window overlooked, was brilliantly lit by the full moon. It seems she was romantically given, for she sat down upon her box, which stood immediately under the window, and fell into a dream of musing. Never (she used to say, with streaming tears, when she narrated that experience), never had she felt more at peace with all men or thought more kindly of the world. And as she so sat she became aware of an aged beautiful gentleman with white hair, drawing near along the lane and advancing to meet him, another and very small gentleman, to whom at first she paid less attention. When they had come within speech (which was just under the maid's eyes) the older man bowed and accosted the other with a very pretty manner of politeness. It did not seem as if the subject of his address were of great importance indeed, from his pointing, it some times appeared as if he were only inquiring his way but the moon shone on his face as he spoke, and the girl was pleased to watch it, it seemed to breathe such an innocent and old-world kindness of disposition, yet with something high too, as of a wellfounded self-content. Presently her eye wandered to the other, and she was surprised to recognise in him a certain Mr. Hyde, who had once visited her master and for whom she had conceived a dislike. He had in his hand a heavy cane, with which he was trifling but he answered never a word, and seemed to listen with an ill-contained impatience. And then all of a sudden he broke out in a great flame of anger, stamping with his foot, brandishing the cane, and carrying on (as the maid described it) like a madman. The old gentleman took a step back, with the air of one very much surprised and a trifle hurt and at that Mr. Hyde broke out of all bounds and clubbed him to the earth. And next moment, with ape-like fury, he was trampling his victim under foot and hailing down a storm of blows, under which the bones were audibly shattered and the body jumped upon the roadway. At the horror of these sights and sounds, the maid fainted. It was two o'clock when she came to herself and called for the police. The murderer was gone long ago but there lay his victim in the middle of the lane, incredibly mangled. The stick with which the deed had been done, although it was of some rare and very tough and heavy wood, had broken in the middle under the stress of this insensate cruelty and one splintered half had rolled in the neighbouring gutter—the other, without doubt, had been carried away by the murderer. A purse and gold watch were found upon the victim but no cards or papers, except a sealed and stamped envelope, which he had been probably carrying to the post, and which bore the name and address of Mr. Utterson. This was brought to the lawyer the next morning, before he was out of bed and he had no sooner seen it and been told the circumstances, than he shot out a solemn lip. I shall say nothing till I have seen the body, said he this may be very serious. Have the kindness to wait while I dress. And with the same grave countenance he hurried through his breakfast and drove to the police station, whither the body had been carried. As soon as he came into the cell, he nodded. Yes, said he, I recognise him. I am sorry to say that this is Sir Danvers Carew. Good God, sir, exclaimed the officer, is it possible. And the next moment his eye lighted up with professional ambition. This will make a deal of noise, he said. And perhaps you can help us to the man. And he briefly narrated what the maid had seen, and showed the broken stick. Mr. Utterson had already quailed at the name of Hyde but when the stick was laid before him, he could doubt no longer broken and battered as it was, he recognized it for one that he had himself presented many years before to Henry Jekyll. Is this Mr. Hyde a person of small stature. he inquired. Particularly small and particularly wickedlooking, is what the maid calls him, said the officer. Mr. Utterson reflected and then, raising his head, If you will come with me in my cab, he said, I think I can take you to his house. It was by this time about nine in the morning, and the first fog of the season. A great chocolate-coloured pall lowered over heaven, but the wind was continually charging and routing these embattled vapours so that as the cab crawled from street to street, Mr. Utterson beheld a marvelous number of degrees and hues of twilight for here it would be dark like the back-end of evening and there would be a glow of a rich, lurid brown, like the light of some strange conflagration and here, for a moment, the fog would be quite broken up, and a haggard shaft of daylight would glance in between the swirling wreaths. The dismal quarter of Soho seen under these changing glimpses, with its muddy ways, and slatternly passengers, and its lamps, which had never been extinguished or had been kindled afresh to combat this mournful reinvasion of darkness, seemed, in the lawyer's eyes, like a district of some city in a nightmare. The thoughts of his mind, besides, were of the gloomiest dye and when he glanced at the companion of his drive, he was conscious of some touch of that terror of the law and the law's officers, which may at times assail the most honest. As the cab drew up before the address indicated, the fog lifted a little and showed him a dingy street, a gin palace, a low French eating house, a shop for the retail of penny numbers and twopenny salads, many ragged children huddled in the doorways, and many women of many different nationalities passing out, key in hand, to have a morning glass and the next moment the fog settled down again upon that part, as brown as umber, and cut him off from his blackguardly surroundings. This was the home of Henry Jekyll's favourite of a man who was heir to a quarter of a million sterling. An ivory-faced and silvery-haired old woman opened the door. She had an evil face, smoothed by hypocrisy but her manners were excellent. Yes, she said, this was Mr. Hyde's, but he was not at home he had been in that night very late, but he had gone away again in less than an hour there was nothing strange in that his habits were very irregular, and he was often absent for instance, it was nearly two months since she had seen him till yesterday. Very well, then, we wish to see his rooms, said the lawyer and when the woman began to declare it was impossible, I had better tell you who this person is, he added. This is Inspector Newcomen of Scotland Yard. A flash of odious joy appeared upon the woman's face. Ah. said she, he is in trouble. What has he done. Mr. Utterson and the inspector exchanged glances. He don't seem a very popular character, observed the latter. And now, my good woman, just let me and this gentleman have a look about us. In the whole extent of the house, which but for the old woman remained otherwise empty, Mr. Hyde had only used a couple of rooms but these were furnished with luxury and good taste. A closet was filled with wine the plate was of silver, the napery elegant a good picture hung upon the walls, a gift (as Utterson supposed) from Henry Jekyll, who was much of a connoisseur and the carpets were of many plies and agreeable in colour. At this moment, however, the rooms bore every mark of having been recently and hurriedly ransacked clothes lay about the floor, with their pockets inside out lock-fast drawers stood open and on the hearth there lay a pile of grey ashes, as though many papers had been burned. From these embers the inspector disinterred the butt end of a green cheque book, which had resisted the action of the fire the other half of the stick was found behind the door and as this clinched his suspicions, the officer declared himself delighted. A visit to the bank, where several thousand pounds were found to be lying to the murderer's credit, completed his gratification. You may depend upon it, sir, he told Mr. Utterson I have him in my hand. He must have lost his head, or he never would have left the stick or, above all, burned the cheque book. Why, money's life to the man. We have nothing to do but wait for him at the bank, and get out the handbills. This last, however, was not so easy of accomplishment for Mr. Hyde had numbered few familiars—even the master of the servant maid had only seen him twice his family could nowhere be traced he had never been photographed and the few who could describe him differed widely, as common observers will. Only on one point were they agreed and that was the haunting sense of unexpressed deformity with which the fugitive impressed his beholders. The doctor had bought the house from the heirs of a celebrated surgeon and his own tastes being rather chemical than anatomical, had changed the destination of the block at the bottom of the garden. It was the first time that the lawyer had been received in that part of his friend's quarters and he eyed the dingy, windowless structure with curiosity, and gazed round with a distasteful sense of strangeness as he crossed the theatre, once crowded with eager students and now lying gaunt and silent, the tables laden with chemical apparatus, the floor strewn with crates and littered with packing straw, and the light falling dimly through the foggy cupola. At the further end, a flight of stairs mounted to a door covered with red baize and through this, Mr. Utterson was at last received into the doctor's cabinet. It was a large room fitted round with glass presses, furnished, among other things, with a chevalglass and a business table, and looking out upon the court by three dusty windows barred with iron. The fire burned in the grate a lamp was set lighted on the chimney shelf, for even in the houses the fog began to lie thickly and there, close up to the warmth, sat Dr. Jekyll, looking deathly sick. He did not rise to meet his visitor, but held out a cold hand and bade him welcome in a changed voice. And now, said Mr. Utterson, as soon as Poole had left them, you have heard the news. The doctor shuddered. They were crying it in the square, he said. I heard them in my diningroom. One word, said the lawyer. Carew was my client, but so are you, and I want to know what I am doing. You have not been mad enough to hide this fellow. Utterson, I swear to God, cried the doctor, I swear to God I will never set eyes on him again. I bind my honour to you that I am done with him in this world. It is all at an end. And indeed he does not want my help you do not know him as I do he is safe, he is quite safe mark my words, he will never more be heard of. The lawyer listened gloomily he did not like his friend's feverish manner. You seem pretty sure of him, said he and for your sake, I hope you may be right. If it came to a trial, your name might appear. I am quite sure of him, replied Jekyll I have grounds for certainty that I cannot share with any one. But there is one thing on which you may advise me. I have –I have received a letter and I am at a loss whether I should show it to the police. I should like to leave it in your hands, Utterson you would judge wisely, I am sure I have so great a trust in you. You fear, I suppose, that it might lead to his detection. asked the lawyer. No, said the other. I cannot say that I care what becomes of Hyde I am quite done with him. I was thinking of my own character, which this hateful business has rather exposed. Utterson ruminated awhile he was surprised at his friend's selfishness, and yet relieved by it. Well, said he, at last, let me see the letter. The letter was written in an odd, upright hand and signed Edward Hyde and it signified, briefly enough, that the writer's benefactor, Dr. Jekyll, whom he had long so unworthily repaid for a thousand generosities, need labour under no alarm for his safety, as he had means of escape on which he placed a sure dependence. The lawyer liked this letter well enough it put a better colour on the intimacy than he had looked for and he blamed himself for some of his past suspicions. Have you the envelope. he asked. I burned it, replied Jekyll, before I thought what I was about. But it bore no postmark. The note was handed in. Shall I keep this and sleep upon it. asked Utterson. I wish you to judge for me entirely, was the reply. I have lost confidence in myself. Well, I shall consider, returned the lawyer. And now one word more it was Hyde who dictated the terms in your will about that disappearance. The doctor seemed seized with a qualm of faintness he shut his mouth tight and nodded. I knew it, said Utterson. He meant to murder you. You had a fine escape. I have had what is far more to the purpose, returned the doctor solemnly I have had a lesson—O God, Utterson, what a lesson I have had. And he covered his face for a moment with his hands. On his way out, the lawyer stopped and had a word or two with Poole. By the bye, said he, there was a letter handed in to-day what was the messenger like. But Poole was positive nothing had come except by post and only circulars by that, he added. This news sent off the visitor with his fears renewed. Plainly the letter had come by the laboratory door possibly, indeed, it had been written in the cabinet and if that were so, it must be differently judged, and handled with the more caution. The newsboys, as he went, were crying themselves hoarse along the footways Special edition. That was the funeral oration of one friend and client and he could not help a certain apprehension lest the good name of another should be sucked down in the eddy of the scandal. It was, at least, a ticklish decision that he had to make and self-reliant as he was by habit, he began to cherish a longing for advice. It was not to be had directly but perhaps, he thought, it might be fished for. Presently after, he sat on one side of his own hearth, with Mr. Guest, his head clerk, upon the other, and midway between, at a nicely calculated distance from the fire, a bottle of a particular old wine that had long dwelt unsunned in the foundations of his house. The fog still slept on the wing above the drowned city, where the lamps glimmered like carbuncles and through the muffle and smother of these fallen clouds, the procession of the town's life was still rolling in through the great arteries with a sound as of a mighty wind. But the room was gay with firelight. In the bottle the acids were long ago resolved the imperial dye had softened with time, as the colour grows richer in stained windows and the glow of hot autumn afternoons on hillside vineyards, was ready to be set free and to disperse the fogs of London. Insensibly the lawyer melted. There was no man from whom he kept fewer secrets than Mr. Guest and he was not always sure that he kept as many as he meant. Guest had often been on business to the doctor's he knew Poole he could scarce have failed to hear of Mr. Hyde's familiarity about the house he might draw conclusions was it not as well, then, that he should see a letter which put that mystery to right. and above all since Guest, being a great student and critic of handwriting, would consider the step natural and obliging. The clerk, besides, was a man of counsel he could scarce read so strange a document without dropping a remark and by that remark Mr. Utterson might shape his future course. This is a sad business about Sir Danvers, he said. Yes, sir, indeed. It has elicited a great deal of public feeling, returned Guest. The man, of course, was mad. I should like to hear your views on that, replied Utterson. I have a document here in his handwriting it is between ourselves, for I scarce know what to do about it it is an ugly business at the best. But there it is quite in your way a murderer's autograph. Guest's eyes brightened, and he sat down at once and studied it with passion. No sir, he said not mad but it is an odd hand. And by all accounts a very odd writer, added the lawyer. Just then the servant entered with a note. Is that from Dr. Jekyll, sir. inquired the clerk. I thought I knew the writing. Anything private, Mr. Utterson. Only an invitation to dinner. Why. Do you want to see it. One moment. I thank you, sir and the clerk laid the two sheets of paper alongside and sedulously compared their contents. Thank you, sir, he said at last, returning both it's a very interesting autograph. There was a pause, during which Mr. Utterson struggled with himself. Why did you compare them, Guest. he inquired suddenly. Well, sir, returned the clerk, there's a rather singular resemblance the two hands are in many points identical only differently sloped. Rather quaint, said Utterson. It is, as you say, rather quaint, returned Guest. I wouldn't speak of this note, you know, said the master. No, sir, said the clerk. I understand. But no sooner was Mr. Utterson alone that night, than he locked the note into his safe, where it reposed from that time forward. What. he thought. Henry Jekyll forge for a murderer. And his blood ran cold in his veins. Much of his past was unearthed, indeed, and all disreputable tales came out of the man's cruelty, at once so callous and violent of his vile life, of his strange associates, of the hatred that seemed to have surrounded his career but of his present whereabouts, not a whisper. From the time he had left the house in Soho on the morning of the murder, he was simply blotted out and gradually, as time drew on, Mr. Utterson began to recover from the hotness of his alarm, and to grow more at quiet with himself. The death of Sir Danvers was, to his way of thinking, more than paid for by the disappearance of Mr. Hyde. Now that that evil influence had been withdrawn, a new life began for Dr. Jekyll. He came out of his seclusion, renewed relations with his friends, became once more their familiar guest and entertainer and whilst he had always been known for charities, he was now no less distinguished for religion. He was busy, he was much in the open air, he did good his face seemed to open and brighten, as if with an inward consciousness of service and for more than two months, the doctor was at peace. On the 8th of January Utterson had dined at the doctor's with a small party Lanyon had been there and the face of the host had looked from one to the other as in the old days when the trio were inseparable friends. On the 12th, and again on the 14th, the door was shut against the lawyer. The doctor was confined to the house, Poole said, and saw no one. On the 15th, he tried again, and was again refused and having now been used for the last two months to see his friend almost daily, he found this return of solitude to weigh upon his spirits. The fifth night he had in Guest to dine with him and the sixth he betook himself to Dr. Lanyon's. There at least he was not denied admittance but when he came in, he was shocked at the change which had taken place in the doctor's appearance. He had his death-warrant written legibly upon his face. The rosy man had grown pale his flesh had fallen away he was visibly balder and older and yet it was not so much these tokens of a swift physical decay that arrested the lawyer's notice, as a look in the eye and quality of manner that seemed to testify to some deep-seated terror of the mind. It was unlikely that the doctor should fear death and yet that was what Utterson was tempted to suspect. Yes, he thought he is a doctor, he must know his own state and that his days are counted and the knowledge is more than he can bear. And yet when Utterson remarked on his ill-looks, it was with an air of great firmness that Lanyon declared himself a doomed man. I have had a shock, he said, and I shall never recover. It is a question of weeks. Well, life has been pleasant I liked it yes, sir, I used to like it. I sometimes think if we knew all, we should be more glad to get away. Jekyll is ill, too, observed Utterson. Have you seen him. But Lanyon's face changed, and he held up a trembling hand. I wish to see or hear no more of Dr. Jekyll, he said in a loud, unsteady voice. I am quite done with that person and I beg that you will spare me any allusion to one whom I regard as dead. Tut-tut, said Mr. Utterson and then after a considerable pause, Can't I do anything. he inquired. We are three very old friends, Lanyon we shall not live to make others. Nothing can be done, returned Lanyon ask himself. He will not see me, said the lawyer. I am not surprised at that, was the reply. Some day, Utterson, after I am dead, you may perhaps come to learn the right and wrong of this. I cannot tell you. And in the meantime, if you can sit and talk with me of other things, for God's sake, stay and do so but if you cannot keep clear of this accursed topic, then in God's name, go, for I cannot bear it. As soon as he got home, Utterson sat down and wrote to Jekyll, complaining of his exclusion from the house, and asking the cause of this unhappy break with Lanyon and the next day brought him a long answer, often very pathetically worded, and sometimes darkly mysterious in drift. The quarrel with Lanyon was incurable. I do not blame our old friend, Jekyll wrote, but I share his view that we must never meet. I mean from henceforth to lead a life of extreme seclusion you must not be surprised, nor must you doubt my friendship, if my door is often shut even to you. You must suffer me to go my own dark way. I have brought on myself a punishment and a danger that I cannot name. I could not think that this earth contained a place for sufferings and terrors so unmanning and you can do but one thing, Utterson, to lighten this destiny, and that is to respect my silence. Utterson was amazed the dark influence of Hyde had been withdrawn, the doctor had returned to his old tasks and amities a week ago, the prospect had smiled with every promise of a cheerful and an honoured age and now in a moment, friendship, and peace of mind, and the whole tenor of his life were wrecked. So great and unprepared a change pointed to madness but in view of Lanyon's manner and words, there must lie for it some deeper ground. A week afterwards Dr. Lanyon took to his bed, and in something less than a fortnight he was dead. The night after the funeral, at which he had been sadly affected, Utterson locked the door of his business room, and sitting there by the light of a melancholy candle, drew out and set before him an envelope addressed by the hand and sealed with the seal of his dead friend. I have buried one friend today, he thought what if this should cost me another. And then he condemned the fear as a disloyalty, and broke the seal. Within there was another enclosure, likewise sealed, and marked upon the cover as not to be opened till the death or disappearance of Dr. Henry Jekyll. Utterson could not trust his eyes. Yes, it was disappearance here again, as in the mad will which he had long ago restored to its author, here again were the idea of a disappearance and the name of Henry Jekyll bracketted. But in the will, that idea had sprung from the sinister suggestion of the man Hyde it was set there with a purpose all too plain and horrible. Written by the hand of Lanyon, what should it mean. A great curiosity came on the trustee, to disregard the prohibition and dive at once to the bottom of these mysteries but professional honour and faith to his dead friend were stringent obligations and the packet slept in the inmost corner of his private safe. It is one thing to mortify curiosity, another to conquer it and it may be doubted if, from that day forth, Utterson desired the society of his surviving friend with the same eagerness. He thought of him kindly but his thoughts were disquieted and fearful. He went to call indeed but he was perhaps relieved to be denied admittance perhaps, in his heart, he preferred to speak with Poole upon the doorstep and surrounded by the air and sounds of the open city, rather than to be admitted into that house of voluntary bondage, and to sit and speak with its inscrutable recluse. Poole had, indeed, no very pleasant news to communicate. The doctor, it appeared, now more than ever confined himself to the cabinet over the laboratory, where he would sometimes even sleep he was out of spirits, he had grown very silent, he did not read it seemed as if he had something on his mind. Utterson became so used to the unvarying character of these reports, that he fell off little by little in the frequency of his visits. Well, said Enfield, that story's at an end at least. We shall never see more of Mr. Hyde. I hope not, said Utterson. Did I ever tell you that I once saw him, and shared your feeling of repulsion. It was impossible to do the one without the other, returned Enfield. And by the way, what an ass you must have thought me, not to know that this was a back way to Dr. Jekyll's. It was partly your own fault that I found it out, even when I did. So you found it out, did you. said Utterson. But if that be so, we may step into the court and take a look at the windows. To tell you the truth, I am uneasy about poor Jekyll and even outside, I feel as if the presence of a friend might do him good. The court was very cool and a little damp, and full of premature twilight, although the sky, high up overhead, was still bright with sunset. The middle one of the three windows was half-way open and sitting close beside it, taking the air with an infinite sadness of mien, like some disconsolate prisoner, Utterson saw Dr. Jekyll. What. Jekyll. he cried. I trust you are better. I am very low, Utterson, replied the doctor drearily, very low. It will not last long, thank God. You stay too much indoors, said the lawyer. You should be out, whipping up the circulation like Mr. Enfield and me. (This is my cousin –Mr. Enfield– Dr. Jekyll.) Come now get your hat and take a quick turn with us. You are very good, sighed the other. I should like to very much but no, no, no, it is quite impossible I dare not. But indeed, Utterson, I am very glad to see you this is really a great pleasure I would ask you and Mr. Enfield up, but the place is really not fit. Why, then, said the lawyer, good-naturedly, the best thing we can do is to stay down here and speak with you from where we are. That is just what I was about to venture to propose, returned the doctor with a smile. But the words were hardly uttered, before the smile was struck out of his face and succeeded by an expression of such abject terror and despair, as froze the very blood of the two gentlemen below. They saw it but for a glimpse for the window was instantly thrust down but that glimpse had been sufficient, and they turned and left the court without a word. In silence, too, they traversed the by-street and it was not until they had come into a neighbouring thoroughfare, where even upon a Sunday there were still some stirrings of life, that Mr. Utterson at last turned and looked at his companion. They were both pale and there was an answering horror in their eyes. God forgive us, God forgive us, said Mr. Utterson. But Mr. Enfield only nodded his head very seriously, and walked on once more in silence. Bless me, Poole, what brings you here. he cried and then taking a second look at him, What ails you. he added is the doctor ill. Mr. Utterson, said the man, there is something wrong. Take a seat, and here is a glass of wine for you, said the lawyer. Now, take your time, and tell me plainly what you want. You know the doctor's ways, sir, replied Poole, and how he shuts himself up. Well, he's shut up again in the cabinet and I don't like it, sir—I wish I may die if I like it. Mr. Utterson, sir, I'm afraid. Now, my good man, said the lawyer, be explicit. What are you afraid of. I've been afraid for about a week, returned Poole, doggedly disregarding the question, and I can bear it no more. The man's appearance amply bore out his words his manner was altered for the worse and except for the moment when he had first announced his terror, he had not once looked the lawyer in the face. Even now, he sat with the glass of wine untasted on his knee, and his eyes directed to a corner of the floor. I can bear it no more, he repeated. Come, said the lawyer, I see you have some good reason, Poole I see there is something seriously amiss. Try to tell me what it is. I think there's been foul play, said Poole, hoarsely. Foul play. cried the lawyer, a good deal frightened and rather inclined to be irritated in consequence. What foul play. What does the man mean. I daren't say, sir, was the answer but will you come along with me and see for yourself. Mr. Utterson's only answer was to rise and get his hat and greatcoat but he observed with wonder the greatness of the relief that appeared upon the butler's face, and perhaps with no less, that the wine was still untasted when he set it down to follow. It was a wild, cold, seasonable night of March, with a pale moon, lying on her back as though the wind had tilted her, and flying wrack of the most diaphanous and lawny texture. The wind made talking difficult, and flecked the blood into the face. It seemed to have swept the streets unusually bare of passengers, besides for Mr. Utterson thought he had never seen that part of London so deserted. He could have wished it otherwise never in his life had he been conscious of so sharp a wish to see and touch his fellow-creatures for struggle as he might, there was borne in upon his mind a crushing anticipation of calamity. The square, when they got there, was full of wind and dust, and the thin trees in the garden were lashing themselves along the railing. Poole, who had kept all the way a pace or two ahead, now pulled up in the middle of the pavement, and in spite of the biting weather, took off his hat and mopped his brow with a red pocket-handkerchief. But for all the hurry of his coming, these were not the dews of exertion that he wiped away, but the moisture of some strangling anguish for his face was white and his voice, when he spoke, harsh and broken. Well, sir, he said, here we are, and God grant there be nothing wrong. Amen, Poole, said the lawyer. Thereupon the servant knocked in a very guarded manner the door was opened on the chain and a voice asked from within, Is that you, Poole. It's all right, said Poole. Open the door. The hall, when they entered it, was brightly lighted up the fire was built high and about the hearth the whole of the servants, men and women, stood huddled together like a flock of sheep. At the sight of Mr. Utterson, the housemaid broke into hysterical whimpering and the cook, crying out Bless God. it's Mr. Utterson, ran forward as if to take him in her arms. What, what. Are you all here. said the lawyer peevishly. Very irregular, very unseemly your master would be far from pleased. They're all afraid, said Poole. Blank silence followed, no one protesting only the maid lifted her voice and now wept loudly. Hold your tongue. Poole said to her, with a ferocity of accent that testified to his own jangled nerves and indeed, when the girl had so suddenly raised the note of her lamentation, they had all started and turned towards the inner door with faces of dreadful expectation. And now, continued the butler, addressing the knife-boy, reach me a candle, and we'll get this through hands at once. And then he begged Mr. Utterson to follow him, and led the way to the back garden. Now, sir, said he, you come as gently as you can. I want you to hear, and I don't want you to be heard. And see here, sir, if by any chance he was to ask you in, don't go. Mr. Utterson's nerves, at this unlooked-for termination, gave a jerk that nearly threw him from his balance but he recollected his courage and followed the butler into the laboratory building through the surgical theatre, with its lumber of crates and bottles, to the foot of the stair. Here Poole motioned him to stand on one side and listen while he himself, setting down the candle and making a great and obvious call on his resolution, mounted the steps and knocked with a somewhat uncertain hand on the red baize of the cabinet door. Mr. Utterson, sir, asking to see you, he called and even as he did so, once more violently signed to the lawyer to give ear. A voice answered from within Tell him I cannot see anyone, it said complainingly. Thank you, sir, said Poole, with a note of something like triumph in his voice and taking up his candle, he led Mr. Utterson back across the yard and into the great kitchen, where the fire was out and the beetles were leaping on the floor. Sir, he said, looking Mr. Utterson in the eyes, Was that my master's voice. It seems much changed, replied the lawyer, very pale, but giving look for look. Changed. Well, yes, I think so, said the butler. Have I been twenty years in this man's house, to be deceived about his voice. No, sir master's made away with he was made away with eight days ago, when we heard him cry out upon the name of God and who's in there instead of him, and why it stays there, is a thing that cries to Heaven, Mr. Utterson. This is a very strange tale, Poole this is rather a wild tale my man, said Mr. Utterson, biting his finger. Suppose it were as you suppose, supposing Dr. Jekyll to have been—well, murdered what could induce the murderer to stay. That won't hold water it doesn't commend itself to reason. Well, Mr. Utterson, you are a hard man to satisfy, but I'll do it yet, said Poole. All this last week (you must know) him, or it, whatever it is that lives in that cabinet, has been crying night and day for some sort of medicine and cannot get it to his mind. It was sometimes his way –the master's, that is– to write his orders on a sheet of paper and throw it on the stair. We've had nothing else this week back nothing but papers, and a closed door, and the very meals left there to be smuggled in when nobody was looking. Well, sir, every day, ay, and twice and thrice in the same day, there have been orders and complaints, and I have been sent flying to all the wholesale chemists in town. Every time I brought the stuff back, there would be another paper telling me to return it, because it was not pure, and another order to a different firm. This drug is wanted bitter bad, sir, whatever for. Have you any of these papers. asked Mr. Utterson. Poole felt in his pocket and handed out a crumpled note, which the lawyer, bending nearer to the candle, carefully examined. Its contents ran thus Dr. Jekyll presents his compliments to Messrs. Maw. He assures them that their last sample is impure and quite useless for his present purpose. Expense is no consideration. So far the letter had run composedly enough, but here with a sudden splutter of the pen, the writer's emotion had broken loose. For God's sake, he added, find me some of the old. This is a strange note, said Mr. Utterson and then sharply, How do you come to have it open. The man at Maw's was main angry, sir, and he threw it back to me like so much dirt, returned Poole. This is unquestionably the doctor's hand, do you know. resumed the lawyer. I thought it looked like it, said the servant rather sulkily and then, with another voice, But what matters hand of write. he said. I've seen him. Seen him. repeated Mr. Utterson. Well. That's it. said Poole. It was this way. I came suddenly into the theater from the garden. It seems he had slipped out to look for this drug or whatever it is for the cabinet door was open, and there he was at the far end of the room digging among the crates. He looked up when I came in, gave a kind of cry, and whipped upstairs into the cabinet. It was but for one minute that I saw him, but the hair stood upon my head like quills. Sir, if that was my master, why had he a mask upon his face. If it was my master, why did he cry out like a rat, and run from me. I have served him long enough. And then... The man paused and passed his hand over his face. These are all very strange circumstances, said Mr. Utterson, but I think I begin to see daylight. Your master, Poole, is plainly seized with one of those maladies that both torture and deform the sufferer hence, for aught I know, the alteration of his voice hence the mask and the avoidance of his friends hence his eagerness to find this drug, by means of which the poor soul retains some hope of ultimate recovery –God grant that he be not deceived. There is my explanation it is sad enough, Poole, ay, and appalling to consider but it is plain and natural, hangs well together, and delivers us from all exorbitant alarms. Sir, said the butler, turning to a sort of mottled pallor, that thing was not my master, and there's the truth. My master –here he looked round him and began to whisper– is a tall, fine build of a man, and this was more of a dwarf. Utterson attempted to protest. O, sir, cried Poole, do you think I do not know my master after twenty years. Do you think I do not know where his head comes to in the cabinet door, where I saw him every morning of my life. No, sir, that thing in the mask was never Dr. Jekyll—God knows what it was, but it was never Dr. Jekyll and it is the belief of my heart that there was murder done. Poole, replied the lawyer, if you say that, it will become my duty to make certain. Much as I desire to spare your master's feelings, much as I am puzzled by this note which seems to prove him to be still alive, I shall consider it my duty to break in that door. cried the butler. And now comes the second question, resumed Utterson Who is going to do it. Why, you and me, sir, was the undaunted reply. That's very well said, returned the lawyer and whatever comes of it, I shall make it my business to see you are no loser. There is an axe in the theatre, continued Poole and you might take the kitchen poker for yourself. The lawyer took that rude but weighty instrument into his hand, and balanced it. Do you know, Poole, he said, looking up, that you and I are about to place ourselves in a position of some peril. You may say so, sir, indeed, returned the butler. It is well, then that we should be frank, said the other. We both think more than we have said let us make a clean breast. This masked figure that you saw, did you recognise it. Well, sir, it went so quick, and the creature was so doubled up, that I could hardly swear to that, was the answer. But if you mean, was it Mr. Hyde.—why, yes, I think it was. You see, it was much of the same bigness and it had the same quick, light way with it and then who else could have got in by the laboratory door. You have not forgot, sir, that at the time of the murder he had still the key with him. But that's not all. I don't know, Mr. Utterson, if you ever met this Mr. Hyde. Yes, said the lawyer, I once spoke with him. Then you must know as well as the rest of us that there was something queer about that gentleman—something that gave a man a turn– I don't know rightly how to say it, sir, beyond this that you felt in your marrow kind of cold and thin. I own I felt something of what you describe, said Mr. Utterson. Quite so, sir, returned Poole. Well, when that masked thing like a monkey jumped from among the chemicals and whipped into the cabinet, it went down my spine like ice. O, I know it's not evidence, Mr. Utterson I'm booklearned enough for that but a man has his feelings, and I give you my bible-word it was Mr. Hyde. Ay, ay, said the lawyer. My fears incline to the same point. Evil, I fear, founded –evil was sure to come– of that connection. Ay truly, I believe you I believe poor Harry is killed and I believe his murderer (for what purpose, God alone can tell) is still lurking in his victim's room. Well, let our name be vengeance. Call Bradshaw. The footman came at the summons, very white and nervous. Put yourself together, Bradshaw, said the lawyer. This suspense, I know, is telling upon all of you but it is now our intention to make an end of it. Poole, here, and I are going to force our way into the cabinet. If all is well, my shoulders are broad enough to bear the blame. Meanwhile, lest anything should really be amiss, or any malefactor seek to escape by the back, you and the boy must go round the corner with a pair of good sticks and take your post at the laboratory door. We give you ten minutes, to get to your stations. As Bradshaw left, the lawyer looked at his watch. And now, Poole, let us get to ours, he said and taking the poker under his arm, led the way into the yard. The scud had banked over the moon, and it was now quite dark. The wind, which only broke in puffs and draughts into that deep well of building, tossed the light of the candle to and fro about their steps, until they came into the shelter of the theatre, where they sat down silently to wait. London hummed solemnly all around but nearer at hand, the stillness was only broken by the sounds of a footfall moving to and fro along the cabinet floor. So it will walk all day, sir, whispered Poole ay, and the better part of the night. Only when a new sample comes from the chemist, there's a bit of a break. Ah, it's an ill conscience that's such an enemy to rest. Ah, sir, there's blood foully shed in every step of it. But hark again, a little closer –put your heart in your ears, Mr. Utterson, and tell me, is that the doctor's foot. The steps fell lightly and oddly, with a certain swing, for all they went so slowly it was different indeed from the heavy creaking tread of Henry Jekyll. Utterson sighed. Is there never anything else. he asked. Poole nodded. Once, he said. Once I heard it weeping. Weeping. how that. said the lawyer, conscious of a sudden chill of horror. Weeping like a woman or a lost soul, said the butler. I came away with that upon my heart, that I could have wept too. But now the ten minutes drew to an end. Poole disinterred the axe from under a stack of packing straw the candle was set upon the nearest table to light them to the attack and they drew near with bated breath to where that patient foot was still going up and down, up and down, in the quiet of the night. Jekyll, cried Utterson, with a loud voice, I demand to see you. He paused a moment, but there came no reply. I give you fair warning, our suspicions are aroused, and I must and shall see you, he resumed if not by fair means, then by foul –if not of your consent, then by brute force. Utterson, said the voice, for God's sake, have mercy. Ah, that's not Jekyll's voice—it's Hyde's. cried Utterson. Down with the door, Poole. Poole swung the axe over his shoulder the blow shook the building, and the red baize door leaped against the lock and hinges. A dismal screech, as of mere animal terror, rang from the cabinet. Up went the axe again, and again the panels