or extremely weary · Ne ileri görmesi. Adam burnunun ucunu bile göremiyor. Who knows what's ahead. Man doesn't even know what is very soon to be. · Çok yorgunsun burnunun ucunu görecek durumda degilsin. You are really tired you're in no condition to even see the end of your nose. Burnunun dibindeki evi görmemiş bucak bucak dolaşıp kiralık apartman arıyor. He didn't notice the (nice, available) house nearby (instead) he's looking in every nook and cranny for a rental apartment. 67 · Öyle sarhoş ki burnunun ucunu bile göremiyor. He's so drunk he can't even see the end of his nose. burun buruna gelmek to come nose to come face to face to nose (with sb) burun kıvırmak to curl the nose burnundan kıl aldırmamak to not let hair be removed from the nose. Please come Buyurun cenaze namazına. in, to the corpse, to the worship. buz üstüne yazı yazmak to write on ice Kapı da nöbetçi ile burun buruna geldik. We came face to face with the guard at the gate. · to smirk at some thing or person · to turn one's nose up, to sniff at Bizim başarımıza burun kıvırdı. She turned her nose up at our success. · to not be open to criticism · to meet criticism with anger · to be very conceited and unapproachable Hem bu türden olumsuz işler yapıyor, hem de burnundan kıl aldırmıyor. He does these kinds of negative things and at the same time he's not open to criticism. We've had it. (Said when one is faced with an unpleasant situation, for which one is unprepared.) Çok yazık. Yapılacak bir şey de yok. Bugün yazılı varmış, buyurun cenaze namazına. It's a great pity. And there's nothing that can be done. Today was bound to come sometime (...was fated). We've had it, now. · exert useless effort · make statements that are ineffective · do work whose effect is just temporary Kalıcı bir çözüm bulamadık, buz üstüne yazı yazıyoruz. We didn't find a permanent solution, we are writing on ice. 68 bülbül kesilmek · for the nightingale to be cut · to become like the nightingale · to give in under pressure (and to reveal one's secrets or feelings) · to talk rather grandly, but with weak resolve · to (finally) reveal previously unrevealed interest in sth · Üzüntüye dayanamaz duruma gelince bülbül kesilmişti. When it came to the point that he couldn't stand the sadness, he gave into his emotions and told me everything. · Deminden beri susan adam, işin ucunda para olduğunu öğrenince bülbül kesildi. See that man who has kept quiet until now. He sure got interested -when he learned that money was the object of the 'game'. büyük sözüme tövbe vow 'never again' to my big words same meaning Büyük sözüme tövbe, işlerimiz iyi gidiyor. I vow never to say this again, but our business is going very well. büyümüş de küçülmüş grown and small to be mature in speech and behaviour -- despite being young. Bu çocuk çok akıllı, bilgili büyümüş de küçülmüş sanki. This child is very intelligent and knowledgeable it's as if she were mature beyond her years. color bar color bar color bar color bar 69 Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter C The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning Comments and Examples cadı kazanı a witch's cauldron a den of intrigue/mischief Büro tam bir cadı kazanı. Herkes birbirinin kuyusunu kazıyor. The office is a real den of intrigue. Everyone is laying traps for one another. caka satmak to sell showing off to show off, swagger Binmiş Mersedes arabaya orada burada millete caka satıyor. [The guy is] riding around in a Mercedes, showing off here and there to everybody. camı çerçeveyi indirmek to take down (bring down) the glass and the frame to go berserk Eve içkili gelmişti. Karısının kendisini terkettiğini görünce sinirden camı çerçeveyi indirdi. He had come home drunk. When he saw that his wife had left him, he lost his cool and went berserk. cami/minare yıkılmış ama mihrap/mihrabı yerinde the she may have mosque/minaret aged but she's still has been topgood-looking pled but the mihrap (mihrab) is still in place. Also seen as caka yapmak. Note the mihrap (mihrab) · Kızı Yosun'u evlendirdikten sonra soluğu Bodrum'da alan Ender Mermerci'yi görenler, 'Ender hanım yıllara meydan okuyor. Minare yıkılmış ama mihrap yerinde sözü kendisine uyuyor. 70 is the niche in the mosque wall that indicates the direction of Mecca. Those who saw Ender Mermerci taking a breather in Bodrum (after her daughter Yosun's marriage) said, ‘Lady Ender challenges the years. It's fitting to say that she may have aged but she's still looking good.' · Yaşlı, ama dinç kalmış cami yıkılmış ama mihrabı yerinde. She's older but vigorous and active. And she's still good-looking in spite of her age. can atmak to throw soul/life to desire very pas- Büyük annem o kasionately, to want dar ilginç hikayeler a lot anlatırdı ki, onu dinlemeye can atardık. My grandmother used to tell us such interesting stories that we used to want to listen to her a lot. can çekişmek to life bicker to be at death's door, to be dying in agony, to be about to die · Uzun süredir yağmur yağmayan Kızılırmak Deltası'nda doğal hayat can çekişiyor. Natural life in the Kızıl Irmak River (Red River) Delta (where it hasn't rained for a long time) is at death's door. · Burcun tepesinde, beyazlı siyahlı bir bayrak, can çekişen bir kartal gibi 71 kıvranıyordu. At the top of the tower a black and white flag writhed like an eagle dying in agony. · Kaza yerine vardığımızda köpeğimiz can çekişiyordu. Kısa süre sonra öldü. When we arrived at the scene of the accident, our dog was about to die. It died after a short time. · can damarı · vein of life · can damarına · to press the vein of life basmak can dostu friend of soul · the vital point or part, the most sensitive spot, the life's blood · to press a sensitive spot · Porsuk çayı, bu toprakların can damarı gibidir. Badger Creek is like the life's blood of the land around here. [...these lands.] · Can damarına bastın, kızdırdın, köpürttün adamı. You pressed his sensitive spot, which caused the man to become angry and explode. closest friend, true O benim can dosfriend tumdu. Gidişi beni çok mutsuz etti. She was my closest friend. Her going made me very unhappy. 72 can düşmanı enemy of soul mortal enemy, the most-hated enemy · Benim can düş manım babamın katilidir. My mortal enemy is my father's murderer. · Baban o senin. Can düşmanın değil ya. He is your father. Not your mortal enemy. can gelmek for life to come to get refreshed, to Uzun bir yürüyüşten get stronger and sonra yorgun active düştüm. Çam ağaçlarının altında biraz dinlenince bacaklarıma can geldi. After a long walk, I got very tired. When I had a rest under the pine trees, the strength returned to my legs. can kulağı ile dinlemek to listen with the ear of soul to listen very care- Öğretmenini can kufully, to be all ears lağıyla dinlemezsen derslerini iyi öğrenemezsin. If you don't listen to your teacher very carefully, you can't learn your lessons well. can pazarı [a] soul market a matter of life [a] life bazaar and death a life and death situation a dangerous time or situation in which everyone tries to save his/her own life Büyük bir gürültüyle yer sarsılıp, herkes sokağa fırlayınca, bir anda ortalık can pazarına dönüştü. With a loud noise the earth began to shake, and when everyone ran out into the street, it was a life and death situation. 73 can yoldaşı soul [traveling] companion close, heartfelt friend or companion Heidi dağlarda yalnız yaşayan dedesine bütün kış can yoldaşı olmuştu. Heidi had been a wonderful companion all winter for her grandfather who lived in the mountains. cana can katmak to add soul to the soul to increase one's pleasure and health, to give a lot of joy and health Her sabah bir bardak portakal suyu ve bir kaşık bal cana can katar. A glass of orange juice and a spoonful of honey every morning gives one joy and health. cana yakın close to soul friendly Kardeşim çok cana yakın bir insandır. Eminim onu tanıyınca seveceksin. My sister is a very friendly. I'm sure you'll like her when you meet. canavar kesilmek for a monster to to become mercibe cut less and fierce candan from soul Başbakan seçilmeden önce demokrat bir kadın gibi görünüyordu ama seçildikten sonra canavar kesildi. She seemed like a democratic woman before being elected Prime Minister but she became merciless after she was elected. heartily, sincerely, Bu devirde candan truly seven az bulunur. In this age, you don't find many who love heartily. 74 canı burnuna gelmek [for] one's soul to come up to one's nose to be overwhelmed by trouble Hem evde hem de fabrikada çalışmaktan canım burnuma geldi. Dayanamıyorum artık. I am overwhelmed by working both at home and at the factory. I can't stand it any more. Canı cehenneme. his/her soul to hell Damn him/her. To hell with him/her. I don't care. Gitmek istiyorsa gitsin. Canı cehenneme. If he wants to go, let him go. To hell with him. canı çekmek one's soul to at- to desire, to long tract for sth Karısı hamileydi ve canı hep dondurma çekiyordu. His wife was pregnant and she always desired icecream. canı çıkmak one's soul to go · to get exhausted out (of one's because of hard body) work · to die · Bütün gün ders çalışmaktan canım çıktı. Biraz dinlenmek istiyorum. I am exhausted because of studying the lesson all day. I want to have a little rest. · Canın çıksın inşallah. I hope you die. canı istemek one's soul to desire Gecenin ortasında, canım biraz ılık süt içmek istedi, bundan dolayı mutfağa gittim. In the middle of the night, I felt like drinking some warm milk, so I went to the kitchen. to desire, to feel like sth 75 canı pahasına at the cost of life at the risk of one's Ailenin güvenliğini life canın pahasına korumalısın. You must protect the safety of your family at the risk of your life. canı sıkmak to squeeze the soul to be annoyed, be vexed (by), to make uneasy canı sıkılmak for one's soul to to get bored be squeezed Bütün gün evde oturmaktan canım sıkıldı. Haydi sinemaya gidelim. I'm bored of sitting at home all day. Come on, let's go to the cinema. canı tatlı his/her soul [is] [sb who is] fond sweet of comfort, afraid of disturbances or hard work O böyle ağır işlere katlanamaz. Canı çok tatlıdır. He can't put up with such hard work. He's too fond of comfort. [His soul is very valuable to him.] canı tez his/her soul [is] [sb who is] impaquick tient Canı çok tezdir. Sabaha kadar bekleyemez. She is very impatient. She can't wait until morning. Canım ciğerim. My soul, my liver/lung. My darling. My beloved one. My dear. · Onun eve gecikmesi canımı sıktı. It annoyed me that she came home late. · İşyerindeki birkaç tembel adam canımı sıkıyor. A few lazy men at the work place annoy me. Haydi canım ciğerim. Güzel bir kahve yap da birlikte içelim. 76 Come on darling. Make some nice coffee and let's drink it together. canımın içi inner part of my soul my darling Nerelerdeydin canımın içi. Seni çok özledim. Where have you been, my darling. I missed you a lot. canına değmek to touch one's soul to please greatly, to make very happy, to 'hit the spot' Hava o kadar sıcak ki. Doğrusu bu bir bardak soğuk su canıma değdi. The weather is so hot. This glass of cold water really hits the spot. canına (acımadan) kıymak to give up one's · to commit suilife cide · to kill without pity · Zavallı çocuk. Karnesindeki zayıf notlardan dolayı canına kıymış. The poor disturbed boy. He committed suicide because of bad grades on his report card. · Zalim adam. O kadar hayvanın canına acımadan nasıl kıydın. You cruel man. How'd you kill all those animals without mercy. canına susamak to feel thirst for to look for trouble Git be adam. Canına one's life mı susadın sen. You'd better beat it, man. Are you looking for trouble. canına tak demek (etmek) to say (do/make) [a knocking to become intoler- Borsacı kadın 4 trilable yonla kaçtı. Bir aydır ortada olmayan 77 sound] to the soul Global Menkul Değerler Şirketi mensubu Ebru Demirok'un kaçmadan önce arkadaşlarına, 'Parasızlık canıma tak etti' dediği öğrenildi. Headline Woman stockbroker runs off with four trillion. canına yetmek to be enough for one's soul to run out of one's patience/tolerance, not to be able to endure any more Bu kadar eziyete daha fazla katlanamam. Artık canıma yetti. I can't endure this much torment any more. I've had enough of it. canından (bezmek, bıkmak, usanmak) to be tired of one's life · to get tired/sick of living · for life to become miserable, unbearable · to lose one's joie de vivre Her şey ters gitmiş. Canından bezmişti, hiç bir şeyden tat almıyordu. Everything 'went south' [for her]. She lost interest in life, and didn't enjoy anything. canını çıkarmak to make one's soul go out (of one's body) to make sb exhausted, to make very tired Antrenör bizi bütün gün koşturarak canımızı çıkardı. The trainer made us exhausted by making us run all day. 78 canını dişine takmak to attach to the soul teeth to make great or desperate efforts, go all out, give it one's all, put one's back into it · Kadıoğlu'nun vaadini duyan Araplar, canlarını dişle rine takmış vuruşuyorlardı. (When) Kadıoğlu's Arabs heard that promise, they really put their backs into the battle. · Aslında çok hastayım. Bütün gün canımı dişime takıp çalışıyorum. In fact I'm quite ill. I've been breaking my back all day. [...working all day spending much effort.] canını kurtarmak to save life same meaning Erken teşhis canını kurtarır. Early diagnosis saves lives. canını vermek to give one's life to sacrifice one's life Çocuklarım için canımı veririm. I'd sacrifice my life for my children. canını yakmak to burn one's soul to hurt, to cause suffering Enjeksiyonlar çocuğun canını yakıyor ama o belli etmemeye çalışıyor. The injections hurt the child but he is trying to conceal it. Canın sağolsun. May your soul be alive. It doesn't matter. Kız Babacığım. KaNever mind. Don't zayla yeni kalemimi worry. kırdım. Baba Canın sağolsun. Sana yeni bir tane daha alırım. Daughter Daddy. 79 I've broken my new pen accidentally. Father Don't worry. I'll buy a new one for you. canla başla çalışmak to work with soul and head cayır cayır [...] [...] [to burn] furiThe words only ously, fiercely have meaning in this idiomatic ‘doublet'. 150 bin dolarlık yat cayır cayır yandı... Headline A $150,000 yacht burned furiously... cefa çekmek/görmek to pull/see cruelty to suffer Çok cefa çektik ama şimdi rahatız Allah'a şükür. We suffered a lot, but we're doing fine now, thank God. same meaning Köpekceğize cehennem azabı çektirme. Don't make that poor little dog suffer [your] tormenting. cehennem azabı hell[ish] torture/torment to put all of one's efforts into a job, to work heartily, to put one's heart and soul into doing [sth] Köy halkı yeni yolun yapımı için canla başla çalıştı. The people of the village put their heart and soul into building the new road. cılkı çıkmak to come out rot- to turn out to be ten eggs, worthless, spoiled to come out festering wound Bizi işe alacağına söz vermişti ama bütün diğer sözleri gibi bunun da cılkı çıktı. He had promised to employ us but like his other promises this one turned out to be worthless too. cız etmek (usually in yüregi cız etmek) to do ‘cız' (a sizzling sound) Zavallı çocuğu çıplak ayakla caddede görünce yüreğim cız etti. When I saw the to feel a pang of sorrow in one's heart for sb else 80 poor child with bare feet on the street, I felt a pang in my heart. cicim ayı pretty month the first month of a marriage when a couple is very happy together Cicim ayları geçince onunla evlenerek ne kadar hata ettiğimi anladım. When my first happy month had passed, I realized the big mistake I had made by marrying him. cim karnında bir nokta the dot on the belly of the 'cim'... a person or thing of no importance, an insignificant person or thing, an ignorant person Onun cim karnında bir nokta olduğunu bilmez gibi kalkmıs, tartışmaya girişiyorsun. As if you don't know that he is an ignoramus, you get up and enter into debate [with him]. The 'cim' is the 5th letter of the Arabic alphabet that was used as the 6th letter of the nowdefunct Ottoman Turkish alphabet -which is pronounced as j in English. cin gibi like a genie very clever and agile Aptal sarışın cin gibi çıktı. Headline A 'dumb blonde' turns out to be very clever and agile. (-da/-de) cirit atmak to throw the jereed (in) · to throw the jereed · with -da/-de (for people/ animals) to take over and do as they İstanbul Şehit Anaları Dayanışma ve Yardımlaşma Derneği üyeleri, protesto ettiler. Çocuklarımızın katilleri sokak- 81 please (in a place) larda cirit atıyor, dediler. Headline İstanbul members of the Martyred Mothers Support and Aid Association make a [public] protest. They said, The killers of our children are taking over the streets and doing as they please. combalak atmak to throw 'combalak' curcunaya çevirmek, curcunaya döndürmek, curcunaya vermek to turn to hulla- to turn a place into baloo a very noisy disordered state, to fill [a place] with the clamor of voices cümbür cemaat everyone together as a group, everyone altogether, the whole 'kit and kaboodle' cürm-i meşhut halinde in a condition of true crime to do a somersault Kilimin üstünde combalak atmayı çok severlerdi. They loved somersaulting on the kilim [carpet]. Kesin lan şu şamatayı. Burayı curcunaya çevirdiniz. Hey you, cut out the clamor. You've turned this place into a threering circus. same meaning Müdürden izin almadan cümbür cemaat odaya doluşmak olmaz. Without permission from the manager, it's not permitted for everyone to wander in the room altogether. · (caught) in the act · in flagrante delicto Bir hafta evvel ikisi de birbirlerini aşıklarıyla cürm-i meşhut halinde yakalamışlar ve hemen ayrılmışlardı. A week earlier they had each caught their lovers in the act 82 [of cheating] and they had immediately separated. color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter Ç The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning çaba göstermek (harcamak, sarfetmek) to show effort to make an effort Yıllarla birlikte kilosu da artan, ancak zayıflamak için hiçbir çaba sarfetmeyen Lily, şimdi hayatını obez olarak sürdürüyor. Lily (who added kilos together with the years, and who made almost no effort to lose weight), now continues her life in obesity. çağ atlamak to jump time Amele pazarına gelen kadınların sayısının sürekli arttığını söyleyen Huriye hanım, Çağ atladık diyen siyasilere en güzel karşılığı veriyor. Lady Huriye (who claims that the number of women entering the labour market is increasing steadily) has the · (for a country) to make up for lost time by modernizing with lightening rapidity · for sb to enter the modern age at a bound Comments and Examples 83 has the best response to politicians when she says, We've modernized ourselves at a single bound. çakı gibi like a pocketknife very active and alert 'on the ball' See example sentence at tıpış tıpış gitmek. çalı çırpı bush chip sticks and twigs Nasreddin Hocaya muziplik olsun diye evvela kurumuş ve tutmasına imkan kalmamış sekiz on adet çalı çırpı vermiş. Because he wanted to tease Nasreddin Hoca, he gave him some sticks and twigs that had no chance of being planted and taking hold. çam devirmek to knock over a pine tree · to make a tactless mistake, to 'put one's foot in it' · to upset the applecart, ruin sth that was going well Düşünmeden konuştu yine çam devirdi. He spoke without thinking again, he 'put his foot in it'. to make/do a wheel 1. military (for troops/ ships) to wheel (in a given direction) 2. to turn from/in/to (a AKP sıfır zamdan çark ediyor. İsçi sendikaları 'sıfır zamma' karşı grev tehdidinde bulununca, iktidar Also see pot kırmak. çark etmek 84 [given] [new] direction) 3. to shift (from one) direction (to another) geri adım atma sinyali verdi. When the worker's labor-parties threatened to strike against the [government's idea of] 'zero salary increase', party officials signaled they'd reconsider (...take a step back). Helga kıskançlıktan çatır çatır çatlıyor. Helga is eaten up by jealousy. çatır çatır çatlamak to crack with a snap · to crack or splinter into pieces · to be eaten up with jealousy çayı görmeden paçaları sıvamak See dereyi görmeden paçaları sıvamak. See dereyi Benim müdür olagörmeden pacağımı söylüyorlar, çaları sıvamak. ama rakipler de oldukça kuvvetli. Bence çayı görmeden paçaları sıvamak doğru değil. They are saying I'll be manager, but the competition is rather strong. So, it's not right to count on my promotion yet. çekip çevirmek to pull and turn to manage (a place/thing) Küçücük kız kocaman evi çekip çeviriyor. That tiny girl manages a 85 whole big house [by herself]. çekirge üç kez sıçramaz the grasshopper didn't jump three times çığrından çıkmak to go out from (for things) to a path go to far (for sth) to take a crazy course (for sb/sth) to go off on a tangent çıktı dokuza inmez he/she/it went up to nine, sekize he/she/it won't come back to eight çil yavrusu gibi dağıtmak to scatter like young hazel grouse See bir sıçrarsın çekirge, etc. See example sentence at bir sıçrarsın çekirge, etc. Terörist sorunu 25 yıl önce çığrından çıkmıştı. The terrorist problem took off on a crazy tangent 25 years ago. She increased her good/bad standing (to a level of nine), and now she can't regress (back to a level eight). · Çok gururlu çıkmış dokuza, inmez sekize. He's so vain he rose to a certain level and now he can't go back to what he was before. · Adı kötüymüş çıkmış dokuza, inmez sekize. She's got a bad reputation, and she can't get her good name back. · for a group to scatter · to run away in every direction like a frightened covey of birds While the Taliban scatters like 86 çile çekmek to pull to suffering 1. to pass through a severe trial, to suffer an ordeal 2. to pass through a forty day novitiate çile çıkarmak/ doldurmak to fill to suffering to undergo a pe- Şükrü şimdi hapriod of torment ishanede, and suffering özgürlüğüne kavuşacağı günü bekleyerek çile dolduruyor. Şükrü is in jail now, he's undergoing a period of torment while waiting for the day he'll regain his freedom. çileden çıkmak to go out of suffering to become furious, to lose control of one's Yıllardır senin çileni çektim. Okuttum, büyüttüm, adam ettim ama sen şimdi beni görmek bile istemiyorsun. For years I suffered for you. I made it possible for you to be edu-cated, I raised you, and made you a man but now you don't even want to see me. Çiçekleri alan talan ediyor, çiçekler koparıyor, se- 87 çileden çıkarmak/ çıkartmak to remove (have sb removed) from suffering temper, to blow one's stack petleri deliyor, bahçıvanı çileden çıkarıyor-lardı. The ones who are taking the flowers are plundering, breaking off the flowers, puncturing holes in the flower baskets and they've made the gardener furious. to infuriate to make sb blow his/her top to 'piss sb off' · Canım, fazla ısrar etme işte, beni çileden çıkaracaksın, sonra kötü olacak. Look my dear, don't keep insisting. You're going to make me mad, and then something bad will happen. · Erzurum'da 'Açız, işsiziz' diye bağıranları 'Saygılı olun' diye azarlayan Başbakan Tayyip Erdoğan, halkı iyice çileden çıkardı. In [the city of] Erzurum, [Turkish] Prime Minister Tayyip Erdoğan (who said Be respectful when he rebuked the protesters who cried out We're hungry, we're unemployed ) 88 infuriated the people completely. çizmeden yukarı çıkmak [çıkmamak] to go up [not go up] from the boot çok ıkınıp sıkınmak See ıkınıp sıkınmak. Çok safsın. You're so gul- · You're so nalible. ïve/gullible. May be used as shown. çürük tahtaya basmak to step on a rotten board O, tedbirli ve akıllı bir insandı, nasıl oldu da çürük tahtaya bastı. He's a very prudent and intelligent guy. So how did he fall into that trap. Also see yaş tahtaya basmak. to try to do sth one is not qualified to do to try to do sth that is beyond one's capacity · to fall into a trap · to be duped to be swindled Akıllı insan çizmeden yukarı çıkmak durumunda kalmaz. A smart person doesn't get stuck in a situation trying to do what is beyond his/her capacity. See another example sentence at yaş tahtaya basmak. color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter D The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning Comments and Examples 89 to come dağdan gelip bağdakini kovmak from the mountains and get rid of the ones in the vineyard for a newcomer upstart (to try) to come in and oust the oldtimers İki günlük memur, yirmi yıllık müdürün yerine atandı. Dağdan gelip bağdakini kovma diye buna derler. A two-day jobholder was appointed instead of the manager with 20 years experience. They call that, Getting rid of the old-timers. dal budak branch knot When used in dal budak salmak for a tree [or sb's reputation, etc.] to grow, be established, become widespread. Adamın ünü o yörede dal budak salmış. The fame of that fellow is spreading around these parts. dalıp gitmek to dive and go to be lost in thought Daldı gitti. Saatlerce kımıldamadı. He was lost in thought. He didn't move for hours. dalga geçmek to pass wave · to kid around with · not to take seriously, pay sth no mind · to goof off, waste time, kill time · Dalga geçme insanla, ciddi konuşacaksan konuş. Don't kid around with a person, if you have something serious to say, then say it. · Dalga geçeceğine önündeki işi yap. Do your work before starting to fool around. · Kızla dalga geçiyor, niyeti ciddi değil. He's killing time with that girl. His intentions aren't serious. damgasını vurmak to hit a rubber stamp 1. to leave one's mark on sb/sth to set one's seal Kösem Sultan çevirdiği entrikalarla Osmanlı tarihine damgasını vurdu. Kösem Sultan (a key figure during the 90 on sb/sth 2. to brand/ label sb 'Reign of Women') left her mark on Ottoman history -- in a swirl of intrigues. Bugün yapılacak toplantıda ya işler çözümlenecek ya da dananın kuyruğu kopacak. Either these work issues will be solved at today's meeting or the sh*t is going to hit the fan. dananın altında buzağı aramak See öküz(ün) altında buzağı aramak. dananın kuyruğu kopmak (koparmak) for the calf's tail to break off · for sth that had been feared to actually occur · for the 'sh*t to hit the fan' dayak yemek to eat a thrashing to get a thrashing or a beating delik deşik lanced hole full of holes Ceplerim delik deşik yahu… Eşim karıştırsaydı, elbette görür dikerdi onları. Look here. My pockets are full of holes. If my wife had been through them, she would have seen and mended them for sure. demir almak to take iron to hoist anchor, weigh anchor Bunu uygun gören reisler hemen demir alıp, yelken kürek kaçmaya başladılar. The boat captains (in accordance with this fitting ploy) immediately hoisted anchor and started escaping at top speed. demir atmak to throw iron to cast anchor Bir gemim olsa gözümü kapar, Kabataş'ın önüne demir atarım diye düşünürdü. He thought, If I 91 only had a ship, I'd close my eyes and be casting my anchor at Kabataş [in İstanbul]. One who falls in the sea, embraces a snake. · A drownMay be used as shown. ing person will clutch at a straw. · People do what it takes to achieve their desired results. dereyi (çayı) görmeden paçaları sıvamak to roll up the trouser-legs before seeing the river (creek) · to act early at an unnecessary time to make preparations before needed · to count one's chickens before they're hatched · to 'jump the gun' · Şarkıcı olduktan sonra da mankenliğe devam edeceğini açıklayan Gizem Özdilli, 2 bin 500 dolara kadar fiyat zammı yapmış. Daha düne kadar tanıtımlardan ve defilelerden 1000 dolar alan Özdilli'nin, fiyatına bu denli zam yaptığını duyanlar da, 'Gizem, dereyi görmeden paçaları sıvıyor' yorumunu yapıyor. Gizem Özdilli (who explained that she'd continue modeling after becoming a singer), increased her fee to $2500. Özdilli until yesterday had only been taking $1000 for appearances and fashion shows... And people who heard (about the big fee increase) commented, 'Gizem is counting her chickens before they're hatched.' dert yanmak to burn chronic sickness to pour out one's troubles (to) Şu anda 400 kilo olan ve halinden dert yanmayan Lily, günlerini yemek yemekle geçiriyor. Lily (who is now 400 kilos and who Denize düşen yılana sarılır. Note Serves both as an idiom and a proverb. 92 doesn't pour out her troubles about her condition) passes her days... eating. Dervişim. I'm a Dervish. · I feel great. May be used as shown. · I'm so happy. devede kulak an ear on a · a small camel piece (of sth quite large) · a very small amount · 'a drop in the bucket' Enerji ve Tabii Kaynaklar Bakanı Hilmi Güler akaryakıt fiyatlarında 1.72 ila 1.82 arasında indirim yapıldığını açıkladı. Ama bu indirim devede kulak kaldı. Hilmi Güler, the Energy and Natural Resources Minister, announced a fuel oil price reduction of between 1.72% and 1.82%. But this reduction is a drop in the bucket. deveye hendek atlatmak to get a camel to jump a ditch to try to get sb to do sth beyond what is possible Şu akılsıza laf anlatmak, deveye hendek atlatmaktan daha zor. Trying to bring this unreasonable guy around to our point of view is almost impossible (...harder than getting a camel to jump a ditch). devlet kuşu (konmak) (for) the state bird (to stay the night) (for) unexpected good luck, a windfall, a godsend (to occur) · Ey uçup giden devlet kuşu, tekrar gelecek misin. Oh, will the good luck that has flown, ever come back again. · Bilge Öztürk, Tarkan'ın sevgilisi(.) olduktan sonra, kendisinin ve ailesinin başına âdeta devlet kuşu kondu. Bilge Öztürk herself and her family members too had unexpected good luck, after she became Tarkan's lover. devre dışı a period outside · (sb) who is · Web erişimini hızlandıran not taking an sistem olan 'proxy' sistemi, 93 devreye girmek to enter a period (term) active part in an activity or an effort, sitting on the sidelines · (a machine) which is not being put to use · (sth) which is disabled · 'out of service' · 'out of order' bir disk arızası yüzünden devre dışı kalmıştır. Bugün yeniden devreye sokmayı planlamaktayız. The 'proxy' system (which is the system that speeds [World Wide] Web access) remains 'out of service' due to a [hard] disk breakdown. · Eraslan Özkaya, Sınırsız din ve vicdan özgürlüğü adına devleti devre dışı bırakmak isteyenlerin amacı önce anarşi, sonra da teokratik (din) devlet düzeninden başka bir şey değil dedi. Eraslan Özkaya [the Supreme Court Chief Justice of Turkey] said, The aim of those (who want, in the name of unrestricted religion and 'freedom of conscious', to put the [Turkish] state 'out of order') is nothing other than anarchy first, followed by the organization of a theoctratic (religious) state. · (for sb) to become part of an activity or effort · (for a machine) to be put into use On orders from President Bush Vice President Dick Cheney and Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz have become part of the effort to block the so-called Armenian 94 genocide bill that is awaiting a hearing in the US Senate. it burns dışı eli [sizi] [yakar], içi beni [bizi] the hand [you] out[yakar] side, it burns me [us] inside · on the outside things seem fine, but inside they are not · don't be deceived by appearances, the real truth is hidden · Siz onu tanımazsınız, o ne kötü kadındır. Kimse bilmez yıllardır bu kadının dışı eli yakar içi beni. You don't know her, she's trouble. No one knew for years that, despite outward appearances, the woman was rotten to the core. · Siz bilmezsiniz dışı eli, içi beni yakar. You don't [really] understand don't be deceived by appearances. to pull careful attention to attract attention Islandığında vücudu neredeyse çırılcıplak gösteren bu mini bikiniler, dikkat çekiyor. These mini bikinis (that show the body almost-naked when wet), are attracting attention. [-a/-e] dil uzatmak to lengthen tongue to malign, defame Papandoniu ve Kretschmer Türk ordusuna dil uzatma cüretini gösterdi. Papandoniu (Greece's Defense Minister) and Kretschmer (the non-voting European Union Ambassador Representing Turkey) had the audacity to malign the Turkish army. [-ı/-i/-u/-ü] dile getirmek to bring to · to make the tongue (sb) talk · to express, speak out dikkat çekmek Also see ilgi çekmek. Onlar gerçekleri dile getirir, ülkenin selameti için ciddi uyarılarda bulunur, sözlerini sakınmadan, dolambaçlı yollara sapmadan dümdüz konuşurlar. 95 They speak out the truth, make serious warnings for the good of the country -- talking in a perfectly straight manner without guarding their words, without swerving in winding ways. diline dolamak to wrap to keep on around the and on (saytongue ing the same thing) Prunella, diline dolamasından korktuğu için komşusuyla konuşmaktan kaçınıyor. Prunella avoided speaking with her neighbor for fear he'd go on and on ... Dimyat'a (Payas'a) pirince giderken evdeki bulgurdan olmak to be without bulgur at home when you go to Da- Ölçüsüz davrandı Dimyat'a pirince giderken evdeki bulgurdan oldu. He acted imprudently he lost what he had in pursuit of what he thought would be better. Notes · Serves both as an mietta for rice… idiom and a proverb. · Damietta (Dimyat) is the Egyptian port at the mouth of the Nile whose market has always featured fine rice. Dingo'nun ahırı Also seen as dingonun ahırı. Dingo's stable to lose what one already has in the pursuit of what one presumes to be better an undisciplined place where all sorts of people come and go as they please See The Best of the Idiom Stories too. Bir yerde düzen, disiplin yoksa, giren, çıkan belli değilse, bu yerin dingonun ahırına benzediğini söyleriz. If there's a place where there's no order or discipline, where the people who come and go are unknown...we say that the place resembles Dingo's stable . 96 dişini sıkmak closetogether teeth · Be patient. · Hang in there. · Grin and bear it. doğru dürüst straight honest properly Seçkin Piriler, 18 yaşıma genuine, real, kadar eli değmedi. Ailem proper çok tutucuydu. Doğru dürüst aşk yaşamadım, artık yaşamak istiyorum' dedi. Seçkin Piriler said, In my 18 years of life, there's not been time to be [romantically] involved with a man. My family is very strict. I haven't had a really proper love [affair], now I want to have one. doğrudan or doğrudan doğruya from directly straight or to straight from straight Biz de hayatımızı doğrudan doğruya etkileyen bu konulara bir pencere açmaya çalıştık. And we've tried to shed some light [open a window] on these subjects directly affecting our lives. dokuz ayın çarşambası bir araya gelmek for a break to come nine month's Wednesday for a lot of pressing work to all come up at once Dokuz ayın çarşambası bir araya geldi yine. Ne yapacağımızı şaşırdık. Again we're overloaded with too much work coming all at the same time. We are confused about what we should do. dokuz doğurmak to give birth to nine to fret and be frantic while waiting for sth Çocukları, o akşam eve gelinceye değin anaları dokuz doğurdu, aklına kötü kötü şeyler geliyordu. Up until their children came home that night, the mothers were frantic, and thoughts of terrible things came to mind. Dişini sık, bir kaç adım sonra kurtuluyoruz… Hang in there, we'll be saved very soon. […after a few steps.] 97 dolap çevirmek (döndürmek) to turn a cupboard · to play a dirty trick on · to 'pull a fast one' · Türkiye üzerine dönen dolaplar. Headline Dirty tricks [are being played] on Turkey. · O kurnaz adam yine bir dolap çevirmiş. That foxy fella has pulled another fast one. dostlar alışverişte görsün let your friends see you at shopping for the sake of appearances in order to look busy Erol, bir iki tane sınav sorusu hazırlamış, herkese söylüyor, dostlar alışverişte görsün. Erol (only) prepared for a few exam questions, then he informed everybody... just for the sake of appearances. dönen dolaplar cupboards that turn dirty trick(s) See example sentence at wrong-doing dolap çevirmek (döndürmek) dört bir tarafı (yanı) four one side on all sides (of it), all around Kadıoğlu, topladığı araplarla gelip Cezayir'i dört bir yandan sardı. Kadıoğlu came to Algiers and surrounded it on four sides with the Arabs he had recruited. dudak bükmek to bend one's lip to make a face, show displeasure, to be displeased with, not to like Yaptığımız işlere dudak bükmekten geri kalmayanlar olabilir. It's possible that the one's who remain behind us will not like the work we've done. · to realize success after having postponed sth time and again · to be rewarded after a patient wait · Durdu durdu evlenmedi, ama son anda turnayı gözünden vurdu. She didn't get married, she didn't get married...but then at the last moment she made a great catch. · Aşk olsun, akıllı adammış, sabretmesini bildi, durdu durdu durdu (da) he stopped (turnayı gözünden and vurdu) stopped (and) (then he hit the crane from the eye) 98 durdu turnayı gözünden vurdu. Well done. He's a smart guy. He understood (the need for) patience, and he was finally rewarded for it. durup dururken (to) stop and while stopping suddenly with no reason without provocation Durup dururken sinemaya gitmek nereden aklına geldi bilmem. I don't know where you suddenly got the idea to go to the cinema. dünya evine girmek to enter the world house to get married · Kayahan'ın dünya evine girme hayalleri, 7.4-şiddetindeki depremle yıkıldı. Kayahan's dream of getting married was destroyed by the violent 7.4-rated earthquake. Sultan Süleyman didn't remain... [Even Sultan Süleyman the Magnificent (a man who had unlimited powers in his day) was mortal.] We're all going to die one day, so let's live a little. Scenario The doctor says you have to go on a strict diet - or else you'll shorten your life. After several unpleasant diet days, you give up the diet saying the phrase in the right hand panel... Dünya Sultan Süleyman'a kalmamış, bana mı kalacak. Sultan Süleyman couldn't avoid death, and neither can I [so I'm going to enjoy myself in the meantime]. Also seen as dünyaevine girmek. dünya Sultan Süleyman'a kalmamış 99 Dünya varmış. · There is a world. · The world arrived. Said after a May be used as shown. change in sth -- for the better. · Ahh. That's better… dünyanın parası world's money · a lot of Hilmi o arabaya dünyanın money parasını verdi. Hilmi paid a · 'Big Bucks' lot of money for that car. düşüp kalkmak to fall and rise up to be in sexual intimacy with, sleep around with, to be a close friend of, to pal around with O günden itibaren Türklerle konuşmamaya, hep Çerkezlerle düşüp kalkmaya başladı. From that day forward, he didn't speak with Turks, he started being close friends with all the Caucasians (Circassians). color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter E The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning Comments and Examples ecel teri dökmek to sweat one's appointed time to die to fear for one's life 316 yolcu havada ecel terleri döktü. Headline 316 (airline) passengers feared for their lives in mid-air. eciş bücüş ... ... · out of shape, crooked, distorted, ruined, ugly · sweet little 100 eden bulmak (çekmek) to find (pull) to get one's just what one desserts does Sen bilmez misin ki, eden bulur. Don't you know one gets his just desserts. efendim my master · Yes. · I'm sorry. · Hello. · Please repeat. See our website or Volume One of this book series for a full treatment. eğilip bükülmek to be bent and to be twisted · to fidget, squirm · to fawn ekmeğini taştan çıkarmak to remove (extract) bread from stone to make a living the hard way, to struggle to make a living Çok çalıştı, ekmeğini taştan çıkardı. She worked hard and made her living the hard way. el ayak hand foot has several situational meanings, see some examples in right panel... · El ayak çekilince bekçi düdüğü duyuldu. When no one's around, the watchman blows his whistle. · eli ayağı bağlı not free to act as you want, having your hands tied · eli ayağı buz kesilmek to be extremely cold el bebek (gül bebek) hand baby (rose baby) · to treat sb with great respect and honor · coddled, spoiled el çabukluğu ile with hand fastness to do a trick so fast that it goes unnoticed finish a job very quickly Also seen (heard) as efenim -- in special situations. Yankesici, el çabukluğuyla adamın cüzdanını aşırmış. The pickpocket speedily made off with the man's wallet. 101 el çekmek to pull a hand to withdraw from, relinquish, give up See example sentence at haline gelmek. el ele vermek for hand to give hand to join forces, cooperate · El ele verince her işi kolayca başarırız birlikten kuvvet doğar. When you cooperate you succeed at every job easily, strength is born from unity. · El ele verip kızcağızı süsleyip püsledik. We joined forces and dolled up our dear daughter [so that she was] 'fit to kill'. I am the sultan taking from the money-bags [of others], so let camels be the sacrificed. I'm someone who spends other people's money to live an ostentatious life. Parası yok, onuru yok el kesesinden sultanım, develer olsun kurbanım, diyor. He doesn't have any money or honor. He says that he likes living ostentatiously -- off other people's money. · to take over the investigation (of an unlawful act) Uzan ailesinin bazı üyeleri hakkında yakalama emri Note This not the same as ele vermek. el kesesinden sultanım, develer olsun kurbanım Note In Ottoman times, the bigger the sacrificial animal the more 'tax' money the sultan could collect. -a/-e el koymak for the hand to be put 102 · to confiscate to sequester çıkarılmasından sonra, ailenin malvarlığına yönelik operasyonlar da sürüyor. Devlet dün Uzan Ailesi'nin iki lüks yatına el koydu. After the siezure order was made regarding certain members of the Uzan Family, operations are continuing to be directed toward the family's assets. Yesterday two of the Uzan Family's luxury yachts were confiscated. Elin sikiyle gerdeğe girersen böyle olursun işte. If you depend too much on the help of others, you'll end up like that [a failure], you see... el sikiyle/ yarağıyla gerdeğe girmek [Be careful with whom you use this, as it is an off-color idiom] [for a man] to enter the wedding boudoir with a borrowed penis · to set up an enterprise with another person's money · to be arrogant in the use of sb else's money, success, home job, etc. · the idiom refers to a man who is likely to fail, because he depends too much on the help of others el sürmemek to not hand drive · not to touch See example sentence · not to do not to at kılını (bile) kıpırlift a finger (to do datmamak. sth) · to show no interest in (sth) el üstünde tutulmak to be held on · to be treated with Ayyıldız'ın 2003 top of the great respect, mayo koleksiyonu hand honor, admiration için objektif karşısına 103 · to be very 'popu- geçen Brezilyalı lar' manken Bruna Magagna, ülkesinde el üstünde tutuluyor. Brazilian model Bruna Magagna who posed for the 2003 Ayyıldız [brand] swimsuit collection is very popular in her country. elde etmek to do/make in hand 1. to get 2. to win sb over to get sb to one's own side · Piknik yerlerinde devriye gezen jandarma ekipleri ateş yakanları uyarmalarına rağmen bir sonuç elde edemedi. In spite of the warnings of the Turkish Gendarme teams (who stroll around the picnic grounds) to picnickers who burn fires, no one pays attention (...they don't get a result). · See another example sentence at turnayı gözünden vurmak. elden çıkmak to go out from hand · to go out of one's See example sentence possession at haline gelmek. · to be out of one's hands (control) · to be out of one's power (to control) ele avuca sığmaz he/she/it out control, uncondoesn't fit to trollable, very palm to hand mischievious, wayward Türkan Şoray, ele avuca sığmayan kızını artık serbest bıraktı. From now on, Türkan Şoray (former beauty queen and now Turkey's grande dame 104 of film and TV) has set her wayward daughter free. ele geçirmek to pass (sb/sth) through a hand · to catch, capture · to get, get hold of · to take possession of Libyalı Tarehanad Elhaddad'ın bagajında yapılan aramada, 8 ayrı külçe halinde tam 30 kilogram altın ele geçirildi. In the search [the police] made of Libyan-citizen Tarehanad Elhaddad's luggage, they took possession of 30 kilograms of gold in 8 separate bars. ele vermek to give to hand to inform on (sb), to tell on (sb) Yükledikten sonra bu yazılım kendisini farkettirmeden çalışıp, gizlice chat ve e-mail kayıtlarını belleğinde tutuyor ve çapkını kısa sürede ele veriyor. After this software is installed, it works by itself in the background, capturing secret e-chat and email entries in its memory, and in a short while it informs on the womanizing 'Casanova'. to pass through a fine sieve to sift, to examine very closely, minutely İstedi ki denizi elekten geçirip onu bulsunlar. He wanted that they examine the Note This is not the same as el ele vermek. elekten geçirmek 105 sea minutely and that they find him. · eli açık · eli bol · open hand · plentiful hand generous Bu senin kardeşin çok eli açık birisi, neyi var neyi yoksa veriyor. This your brother is a very generous person, whatever he has he shares (gives). eli boş empty hand empty handed, penniless, broke Hırsızlar cüzdanını çaldıktan sonra eve eli boş döndü. After thieves stole his wallet, he returned home empty handed. eli çabuk fast hand fast (worker), efficient eli çabuk olanlar ones with fast hands... [-e/-a] eli değmek (ermek, erişmek) to touch (attain, reach) the hand to find the time to do (sth) Sitem etmekte haklısınız, bir elim değip de uğrayamadım. You are right in reproaching [me], I wasn't able to find time to stop by [to see you]. eli kulağında in the ear's hand within an ace of, on the brink of, on the verge of, about to happen, just around the corner Havaya baktı, Eli kulağında, belki bu gece kar yağar', dedi. He looked at the sky and said, We're perhaps on the verge of a snow storm tonight. eli sıkı tight hand to be stingy elinden gelmek to come from the hand to be able to do Elinden geldiğince herkese iyilik eder yardımını esirgemez. 106 He'll try when he can to do a favor for anybody he doesn't withhold his help. elinden geleni yapmak to make the to do the best one coming from can do, do one's one's hand level best, do all one can do elinden tutmak to hold from one's hand · to own, possess · to hold in reserve eline su (bile) dökemez he/she can't (even) pour water to his/her hand he/she is much inferior to sb he/she can't hold a candle to sb · Tavlada kimse babamın eline su dökemez. My father is very expert at playing backgammon (no one can pour water to my father's hand). · O senin eline su bile dökemez. She can't hold a candle to you (she can't even pour water to your hand). · Bobby kay kayda Jimmy'nin eline su dökemez. Jimmy is a far better skateboarder than Bobby. (Bobby can't pour water to Jimmy's hand, at skate-boarding). · See another example sentence at gününü gün etmek. for a woman to try elinin hamuruyle/ mix man's to do a man's job hamuruyla erkek work with işlerine karışmak hand's dough (which is believed to be beyond her Note This capability or skill) · 'Elinin hamuruyla erkek işine karışma' sözü artık tarih oldu. Büyük şehirlerde erkek rakipleriyle Elimden geleni yapacağım. I'll do the best I can. 107 'politically incorrect' sexist idiom is only used for women, normally. yarışan kadın işçiler aç kalmamak için inşaatlarda harç, boya, kalıp işi yapıyor. The words, Don't mix in men's work will have to be relegated to history from now on. [Turkish] women workers (who compete with their male rivals in the big cities) are plastering, painting, and pouring molds at construction sites in order to avoid being hungry and poor. · Musluğu ben tamir ederim, sen neden uğraşıyorsun. Elinin hamuruyla erkek işine karışma. I'll repair the faucet/tap, why are you struggling with it. Don't try to do a man's job. engel çıkarmak to remove to raise or create barrier, diffi- difficulties, barriculty ers, or problems See güçlük çıkarmak and işi yokuşa sürmek. Ensesine vur, lokmasını al. · Hit He/she's a real him/her on pushover. the nape of his/her neck, grab his/her food. · Hit the back of his neck, take his cake. May be used as shown. er geç early late Er geç bir ev ala- one of these days, 108 when it will be cağım. One of these days I'll buy a house. eski çamlar bardak oldu old pines became drinking glass · Times have changed. · Things aren't what they used to be. Artık birbirimizle anlaşamıyoruz, eski çamlar bardak oldu. We don't agree with each other anymore, things aren't what they used to be. eski hamam eski tas old Turkish bath, old metal bowl · Nothing has changed it's business as usual. · History repeats itself there's nothing new under the sun. · It's the same ol' same ol'. Bizim büro eski hamam, eski tas. Şube müdürü değişti, ama yönetim sistemi yine aynı. Nothing has changed at our office, it's business as usual. The branch manager was replaced, but the management system is still the same. eski püskü old ... rather old old and battered looking shabby eski toprak old earth · a healthy, well preserved older person · a 'good old sonof-a-gun.' estağfurullah don't mensame meaning tion it don't say so not at all See our website or Volume One of this book series for a full treatment. eş dost mate friend friends and acquaintances See example sentence at olsa olsa. eşek sudan gelinceye kadar to beat until the donkey to beat the hell out of sb to tan sb's Dükkan sahipleri hırsızlık yapan çocuğu Ey oğul. Biz eski toprağız ölünceye kadar çalışırız. Hey sonny boy. We're old (well persevered) guys, we'll work until we die. 109 dövmek comes from the water hide to beat sb to eşek sudan gelinceye a pulp to give sb a kadar dövdüler. The good thrashing store owners beat hell out of the thieving kid. ettiğini bulmak/çekmek to find/pull what one does/did to get one's just desserts See example sentence at eden bulmak. for skirts to ring bell (s) to be overjoyed (about sth) to be extremely glad/happy/pleased (about sth) · Ağabeyim askerden dönünce annemin etekleri zil çaldı. When my big brother returned from doing his military service my mother was overjoyed (my mother's skirts rang bells). · Şanghay'a gideceği için etekleri zil çalıyor. He/she is extremely happy because he/she is going to Shanghai (his/her skirts rang bells). Also see eden bulmak. etekleri zil çalmak color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter F The Turkish The Literal The 'Plain' English Mean- English ing Meaning Comments and Examples faka basmak to step on a trap to be deBurhan bey, pek çok ceived, duped düşünen, hiç faka basmaor trapped yan, akıllı cesurlardandı. Burhan bey, who was a thinker and not easily duped, 110 was wisely brave. falan See filan, filan falan. fare cirit atmak/oynamak for a mouse to throw/play 'cirit' (for a place) to be deserted, empty Öyle sessiz bir ev ki hiç kimseler yok. Her yerde fareler cirit oynuyor. Nobody is at home in a house that quiet. The place is deserted. [It's such a quiet house that no one exists (there). The mice are playing 'cirit' everywhere.] fare deliğe sığmamış, bir de kuyruğuna kabak bağlamış to not fit into a mouse hole, to also fasten a pumpkin to the tail · for sb to take on new responsibilities when she/he can't handle the ones she/he already has · for sb to not be welcome him/herself, and for him/her then to also bring sb along with him/her Arkadaşlarını da getirmiş, fare deliğe sığmamış, bir de kuyruğuna kabak bağlamış, demek lazım. [Can you believe that] he also brought his friends with him. In the first place, he wasn't welcome himself, and for him then to bring others along too, well, it was really too much. · Farkındayım. · Farkında değilim. · I am in discrimination. · I am not in discrimination. · I realize (that), I understand intuitively, I know that. · I don't realize. I don't understand intuitively, I don't know Note This idiomatic construction may be conjugated like a verb. For example... Farkında değildin -yıldönümümüz dündü. You didn't realize that yesterday was our anniversary. 111 that. to count oneself to think fasulye gibi kendini nimet- a blessing like highly of onea bean self, to think ten saymak oneself to be important, to put on airs Cim karnında bir nokta olduğu halde fasulye gibi kendini nimetten sayıyor. Although he is an insignificant nobody, he has a very high opinion of himself. (Although he is the dot on the belly of the 'cim', he counts himself a blessing like a bean.) (sb who) passed through fate's circle refers to sb who has had ups and downs in life, sb who has been 'through the mill', sb with a great deal of experience Onun bilgisine güvenirim, feleğin çemberinden geçti. Yanılmaz. I trust his knowledge he's very experienced. He doesn't make mistakes. feleğin sillesini to eat fate's slap to suffer the blows of misyemek fortune, to struggle through difficulty, to experience (a) bad event(s), to meet with adversity Kadıncağız, tüm ailesini trafik kazasında kaybetmiş. Feleğin sillesini yemiş, onu bir de sen üzme. The poor old woman lost her entire family in a road accident. She has suffered [enough] misfortune, [so] don't you too distress her. feleğin çemberinden geçmiş felekten bir gün (gece) çalmak to steal a day to have a very Arkadaşlarıyla felekten bir (night) from the enjoyable day gün çalmak istedi. He firmament (or evening) wanted to have an enjoyable day with his friends. fellik fellik aramak to look running to search high all over, runand low (for) ning hither and thither Sometimes Sally hanım, kaybolan çocuğunu her yerde fellik fellik arıyordu. Ms. Sally was searching everywhere 112 seen as fellek fellek aramak. fıkır fıkır high and low for her lost child. ... ... The words in this Turkish Doublet, only have meaning in this idiom. · with a bubbling sound · lively and flirtatious Hayranlarını çok özlediğini belirten Megastar, 'Artık hasret bitti. Herkesi fıkır fıkır oynatacağım. Kimse yerinde duramayacak' dedi. The Megastar (who revealed that he'd missed his fans a lot) said, 'The longing is over. I'll make everybody dance in a lively and flirtatious way. No one will be able to stay in their seats.' fındık kabuğunu doldurmaz to not fill a hazelnut shell (a subject or event that is) trifling, unimportant, nonsensical Mary Ann hanım, kocasıyla fındık kabuğunu doldurmayacak bir sebepten dolayı kavga etti. Ms. Mary Ann quarreled with her husband because of an unimportant reason. fırıldak çevirmek to turn a whirligig to do sth in a tricky way, to 'pull a fast one', to be up to no good Ne fırıldak çevirdiyse çevirdi, orasını bilmiyorum. Fakat sonuçta kadının elinden bütün malını almayı başardı. He may have pulled every trick in the book, I don't know about that. But the result was that he managed to take all of the woman's possessions. fırsat kollamak to watch for an opportunity, to be on the alert for an opportunity same meaning Babasına konuyu açabilmek için bir haftadır fırsat kolladı. She waited a week for the opportunity to open the subject with her father. filan or filan falan given people given things facilitates the meaning of See our website for a full treatment of 'Turkish Dou- 113 blets'. 'and similar things' or 'and similar people' or 'and related things' or 'and so on' or 'and such like' or 'etcetera'. fincancı katırlarını ürkütmek to frighten the mules of the coffee-cup merchant · one should handle ticklish subjects (that can bring harm upon oneself or close friends) with care · one should be careful before ‘rocking the boat' or ‘upsetting the apple cart' Partide donen dolapları ortay çıkarmak için bildiklerimi anlatınca, başkan bana fincancı katırlarını ürkütüyorsun biz öylelerini pek sevmeyiz. dedi. When I told him what I knew (to expose wrong-doing in the political party), the chairman said, Don't rock the boat. We don't like such people at all. fitil fitil burnundan gelmek for wicks (or fuzes) to come from the nose to suffer so much after gaining sth good that one regrets ever having gained it · Bodrum dönüşü arabamız kaza yapınca, yaptığımız tatil fitil fitil burnumuzdan geldi. When we had a car accident on our return from Bodrum, it spoiled the vacation we had had. · Yedik, içtik, eğlendik ama kavga yüzünden burnumuzdan fitil fitil geldi. We ate, drank, and had a good time, but then because of an argument everything was spoiled. Also see burnundan fitil fitil gelmek. 114 fitne sokmak to insert discord to turn one person or group against another Bizim Hayreddin Paşa ile aramız iyi idi. Sen gelip aramıza fitne soktun. Our relationship with Admiral Hayreddin was just fine. Then you came along and turned us against each other. fol yok yumurta yok there is no nest egg, there is no egg for no apparent reason whatsoever there is no proof of its existence …bir bakıyorsun, durup dururken, ortada fol yok yumurta yok, çıkıp gidiyor. [Will you] look at that. Suddenly, for no apparent reason, he takes off and leaves. for the foil to be revealed · for sb's hitherto unknown bad qualities to be revealed · for sb's bad qualities to become apparent because of an event(s) · (for sb) to be found out · (for sb) to be shown up · Kaya'nın uykuları kaçtı. Ünlü yıldız Hülya Avşar, yayınevlerinin 100 milyar liralık teklifini yabana atmayıp, hayatını kaleme alırsa, eşi Kaya Çilingiroğlu'nun bütün foyaları meydana çıkacak. Kaya is worried. [Because] if famous star Hülya Avşar doesn't ignore the book publisher's 100-billion Turkish Lira offer, and if she puts her life story on paper, all of husband Kaya Çilingiroğlu's bad qualities will be revealed. · Bu son olaylar, müdürün foyasını meydana çıkardı. Artık kimse ona güvenmiyor. These latest events have revealed the manager's bad qualities. No one will trust her anymore. for false to go out (of) · (for sth) not AKP'nin emekliye seçim to end up as öncesi verdiği Sizi banka Also see ortada fol yok yumurta yok/yokken. foyası/foyaları meydana çıkmak Note This idiom's root is yet another idiom meydana çıkmak. fos çıkmak 115 frikik vermek to give a 'free kick' Note This idiom is mildly off-color. one had hoped · (for sth) to be long and drawn out önlerindeki kuyruklardan kurtaracağız sözü fos çıktı. The promise given before the election by the 'AK Party' to retired persons that, We will spare you from the long lines in front of banks, didn't turn out as had been hoped. For a woman to ‘expose herself' inadvertently or on purpose. See our website for a full treatment. Bugüne kadar maç sırasında frikik vermemek icin şort ya da eşofman giyen