fikirli with open thought açık kapı bırakmak to leave an open · to leave sb door with room to maneuver · to leave sb some leeway · not to tie one's hands Düşünsünler diye karşısındakilere bir açık kapı bırakmıştı. Because of the things you're concerned about, he gave some maneuvering room to the other side. açık olmak to be open to be sincere and completely honest in dealings with others Arkadaşlarına karşı açık ol, olduğun gibi görün. Be sincere toward your friends, appear like you (really) are. açık oturum open session · a panel discussion · a meeting on a specific subject where everyone at the meeting may ask questions and express opinions openly İşimizin bugünkü durumu üzerine bir açık oturum düzenlendi. He arranged an open panel discussion today about our business situation. açık saçık open and explicit · sth too liberal (as to Paris, Milano ve New York gibi moda 19 language or anatomy) offcolor, risqué, bawdy · sth rude, indecent, immodest (as with clothing) · sth that is found disgraceful by many (people) merkezlerinde sergilenen açık saçık kıyafetleri günlük yaşamda kimsenin giymeye cesaret edemeyeceği konuşulur. Kim giyer dediler sonunda biri giydi. It was said that no one would be brave enough in daily life to wear [Gucci's] immodest [new, topless] dress (prepared in fashion centers like Paris, Milan, and New York). They said, 'Who'll wear it. '...and then, at last, someone did. açık seçik open clear · definitely, clearly · quite clear Yazının açık seçik bir anlatımı var. The meaning of the article is very clear. açıktan açığa from open to open openly, without dissembling Açıktan açığa adayla alay ettiler. They openly ridiculed the candidate. açılıp saçılmak to be opened and scattered · (for a woman) to dress in a sexually provocative manner that is considered to be in bad taste to wear revealing clothes to dress immodestly. · to spend Seksi imaj uğruna açılıp saçılan Madonna'nın transparan giyimi, kocası Guy Ritchie tarafından yasaklandı. Madonna, who dresses immodestly for the sake of her sexy image, has been forbidden from wearing transparent clothes by her husband Guy Ritchie. 20 money extravagantly açlık çekmek to pull hunger to be poor/ im- Savaş yıllarında ne poverished açlık çektik anlatamam. I can't describe the poverty we endured during the war years. [-a/-e] açtı ağzını yumdu gözünü sb opened his/her mouth, and clenched his/her eyes · sb flew off the handle (lost his/her temper) · sb said some very heavy words in anger Adam değilim. I'm not a man. I'll be damned. May be used as shown. (I strongly support [it]./I strongly do not support [it.]) İddiaya göre, gece yarısı teleskobuyla yıldızları seyreden Bilge, sevinç çığlıkları atarak, 'Uçan daire gördüm,' diye bağırıp Tarkan'ı uyandırdı. Korkan ve neye uğradığını şaşıran Tarkan, Bilge'ye açtı ağzını yumdu gözunü. According to the report, [the girlfriend of Turkish popidol Tarkan, named] Bilge (who was viewing the stars with a telescope at mid-night) screamed joyfully, saying, 'I saw a flying saucer' -- and it woke Tarkan up. The confused Tarkan (who was startled and didn't know why he'd been roused) flew off the handle at Bilge. 21 adam evladı man offspring · a person of good family and upbringing · a seriousminded, sedate, sober person · sb inspiring respect Meğer adam evladıymış, bize çok yardım etti. It seems he's well brought up, he helped us a lot. Adam sen de. You are a man too. C'mon, man. Don't worry/Take it easy/Never mind. May be used as shown. adama dönmek · to return to human being · to become a human · (for sb/sth) to turn from bad to good · to (finally) realize a desirable condition · to begin to go well · to look presentable Eh, işte şimdi adama dönmüşsün. Well, look…you finally made it. You're a success. (The same phrase could be said to a man who has just returned from the barber where he had his long scraggily hair shorn.) adamdan saymak (sayılmak) to count [some- (for sb) to be body] as a worthwhile human being (to be counted as a human being) Birkaç lira paran var diye kendini adamdan mı sayıyorsun. Just because you've got a few lira, do you think you're somebody. adamına düşmek to wind up with an individual Çok şükür, tam adamına düşmüşüm, kısa sürede işimi yaptı, bitirdi. Thank God I fell into the hands of an expert. · to fall into the hands of an expert · to meet (by chance) with a competent person 22 · âdembaba (adembaba) · Âdem Baba (Adem Baba) · man-father · 'Father Adam' (alludes to Adam, the first Biblical and Koranic man on earth -- therefore no clothes.) · bedraggled tramp · trampishlooking bedraggled tramp · trampishlooking tourist · stark naked man also see anadan doğma. Adem baba kılığında dolaşıyordu. He was wandering around stark naked. (He was wandering around in the appearance of 'Father Adam'.) afiyet olsun let health be · I hope you enjoy(ed) it [said to sb eating or drinking] · bon appetit. May be used as shown. ağaç olmak to become a tree to stand and wait a long time Ağaca çıksa pabucu If he goes up in a tree, his shoes yerde kalmaz. don't remain on the ground. Note TÇ adds that, It is obligatory to say this at the completion of a meal, by those who dine together. Burada seni bekleye bekleye ağaç olduk. We waited and waited and waited for you here. (We became trees waiting and waiting here for you.) · He's very cautious, he doesn't easily get into trouble. · She's careful, not easily led astray. Onu merak etmeyin, ağaca çıksa pabucu yerde kalmaz. Don't worry about her, she's not easily led astray. The phrase is used, for example, when referring to key persons of opposing groups. See The Best of the Idiom Stories too. ağır top heavy cannon/artillery a 'big gun', an important or powerful person ağzı dört köşe olmak to be four corners' mouth to be all smiles See zevkten dört köşe olmak. 23 ağzı süt kokmak to smell milk in the mouth Ağzı torba değil ki büzesin. · His/her mouth You can't stop someone talkis not a bag whose opening ing. can simply be squeezed shut. · Let not the mouth bag be constricted. Ağzı (var) dili yok. May be used as shown. He has a mouth, · He's very he has no quiet. tongue. · He's no bother. · He doesn't oppose anybody/anything. Ağzına sağlık. Health to your mouth. Well said. May be used as shown. Ağzına vur, lokmasını al. · Hit him/her in He's a real the mouth, grab pushover. his/her food. · Hit his mouth, take his cake. May be used as shown. Note Often seen as Ensesine vur, lokmasını al. to be naive, innocent Akıllı iktidar, milletvekilleriyle bakanlar arasına danışman diye nitelendirilen acemi oğlan misali ağzı süt kokan çocukları koymaz. Smart governing officials don't put naive novicelike children (who are described as consultants) between the parliamentarians and the ministers. May be used as shown. 24 to remove the broad bean from the mouth to put away considerations and speak out to let 'the cat out of the bag' Polis, biraz sıkıştırınca, hırsız ağzından baklayı çıkardı ve çaldığı eşyaları nereye gizlediğini söyledi. When the police pressured the thief a little, he let the cat out of the bag and told where he had hidden the stolen things. ağzından çıkanı kulağı duymamak/ işitmemek · to not hear one's own words coming from one's own mouth · to [pretend] not to hear words coming from one's mouth to one's ear · to not [or to pretend not to] realize what [harsh] things one is saying · to be carried away with one's temper · because of anger, to say rude, offensive, hurtful things Sürekli bağırıyor, ağzından çıkanı kulağı duymuyordu. He was just hollering continuosly, he wasn't realizing what he was saying. Ağzından yel alsın. Let wind take (it) away from your mouth. Heaven forbid. May be used as shown. Don't say that. · ağzını burnunu dağıtmak · ağzını dağıtmak · to scatter/distribute or to break/ dissolve [his] mouth · to scatter [his] mouth and nose · to hit sb in the mouth, to 'smack sb in the kisser' · to hit sb in the face, to 'clobber' sb with a blow to the face Ağzını hayra aç. Open your mouth to good omens. Don't say such May be used as shown. a thing -- it is a bad omen. ağzından baklayı çıkarmak Also see baklayı ağzından çıkarmak. 25 ağzını ıslatmak to wet your mouth to drink, to have a drink ahı tutmak (ahı yerde kalmamak) to hold 'ahhh' (for 'ahhh' not to remain in place) · to have one's curse take effect · to see the comeuppance of a rival or enemy Türklerin ahı tuttu. İngiltere futbol milli takımı Avrupa Kupasından elendi. The curse of the Turks (finally) takes effect. The English national football team has been eliminated from the European Cup. ahkâm kesmek · to cut flimsy speculations · to judge (things or people) halfwittedly · to offer up half-baked ideas as if they were faultless, tried and true · to pass out judgements, put forward opinions based only on superficial information O konuda hiç bir yetkisi yokken ha bire ahkâm kesiyor. He offers up his halfbaked ideas as if they were gospel without having any competence in the subject. ahmak ıslatan · wetting stupidly · (rain) that wets the unwitting a light drizzle (of rain) Ahmak ıslatan bütün gün sürdü, ne yağdı ne açtı hava. The weather is neither clear nor rainy, it's just been drizzling all day. ahret suali a question that will be asked at the gates of heaven a tiresome and difficult question Bırak bu ahret sualini sormayı da istediğini açıkça söyle. Stop asking these tiresome questions and say openly what you really want to say. 26 ahreti boylamak to take the to die measurement of the afterlife (heaven) akan sular durmak to stop flowing waters ...means that the subject under discussion (whether it's a factual conclusion, an oath, an order, or a law) is indisputable, beyond contradiction. Söyledikleriniz ve belirtmiş olduklarınız karşısında akan sular durur. The things you say and the way you clarify them are indisputable (Flowing waters stop when confronted by your factual conclusions). akıl almaz it doesn't take reason unbelievable, inconceivable an intelligence or mind doctor a psychiatrist Also see akla hayale gelmeyen. akıl doktoru 27 Akıl işi değil. It is not reason work. It's not acceptable. May be used as shown. Akıp gitsin. Flow -- go. May all your work go as smoothly as water. May be used as shown. akla hayale gelmeyen (gelmez, gelmedik) not coming to the reason imagined thing · incredible · unthinkable · unbelievable · inconceivable Kendisini çeken video ve fotoğraf kameralarına aldırmadan akla hayale gelmedik şeyler yapan kadın, polisin 'Yeter' ikazı üzerine toparlanıp gitti. When the police warned 'That's enough,' the woman (who had been doing some unbelievable things with indifference for the video and still cameramen who had been filming her), gathered up her clothes and left. Aklına şaşarım. I'm confused to your mind. You're not making any sense. May be used as shown. Aklında olsun. Let (it) be in your thought (s). Don't forget (it). May be used as shown. Akmasa da damlar. And (if) it flows, (it is by) drops. [It keeps dripping, if not exactly flowing.] It brings in at least a little money. May be used as shown. aksi gibi like opposite · ...wouldn't you know it. Aksi gibi cebimde beş para kalmamıştı. It Note akla comes from akıl. Also see akıl almaz. 28 · as if to spite me… · ...it was just [my] bad luck. was just my bad luck not to have any money on me. Akşamdan kalmayım. I have a hangover. akşamdan kalma remaining from the evening having a hangover Al benden de o kadar. · Take from me -- and that much. · Take the same amount from me. May be used as shown. · I'm in the same situation I'm as bad off as you. · I was thinking the same thing I agree. · Al birini vur birine (çarp ötekine). · Take one, hit one (hit the other). · Take one, and hit the other one with it... (so that both useless things can be broken without harming anything else) · It all needs fixing. · None of them are useful. · One is no better than the other. May be used as shown. red flag the Turkish flag also, when spelled as 'Alsancak' it's a borough İzmir city May be used as shown. The buyer agrees, the seller agrees. May be used as shown. Since the two parties agree on the deal, let them complete it without interference from others. · Al birini, vur (çarp) ötekine. al sancak Also seen as alsancak. Alan razı, satan razı. 29 Aldı yürüdü. He/she/it took, he/she/it walked. · He/she/it succeeded in a short time. · It prospered and grew. May be used as shown. alev saçağı sarmak See ateş bacayı sarmak. alkış toplamak to gather applause · to receive applause, to be vigorously applauded · to receive a standing ovation · to be acclaimed Ünlü Popstar Tarkan albümüne adını veren 'Dudu' adlı parçasını yoğun istek üzerine tam 4 kez seslendirdi ve büyük alkış topladı. Famous popstar Tarkan had to sing his song called 'Dudu' (which is also given to the name of his album) 4 times complete on account of strong (audience) demand -- and he received thunderous applause. Allah Yürü ya kulum demiş. Allah bid her/him, Go forward, my subject. May be used as shown. · She has advanced her situation in a very short time. · Whatever job he takes on, it always turns out well. · He certainly got rich fast. Allah [senden] razı olsun. May God be agreeable (to you). God bless you (for the kind act that you May be used as shown. 30 did, for the nice thought you had, etc.). Allah akıllar (akıl, fikir) versin. May God give intelligence. · You're doing May be used as shown. a rather senseless thing/ job/work. · Where is your good sense. · I'm surprised at you/him. Allah Allah. God, God. · What an astonishing thing. · What must we donow. · Oh my, how odd. · Goodness Gracious. 1. Allah aratmasın 2. Allah bugünümüzü aratmasın 1. May God not replace. 2. May God not make (us) wish (or long) for (our) present situation. 1. It's not flaw- May be used as shown. less but it does the job. Besides, what would we do otherwise. 2. We may not be as well off as we might have preferred, but still we are content with it. Allah aşkına. For the love of God. · For heavens May be used as shown. sake. · For goodness sake. · That's amazing. Allah allah, böyle bir şeyi ilk kez görüyorum. Now that's amazing, it's the first time I've seen something like that. 31 Allah bağışlasın. May God refrain (from killing someone). May God protect (children, loved ones) from accident and harm. Allah bana, ben de sana. [From] God to me, and [from] me to you. I don't have the May be used as shown. money I owe you right now, but I'll pay you the minute I get it. Allah bereket versin. May God give abundance. May be used as shown. May God return the generosity you show. This is/may be said by one who receives a tip or a bonus to the person giving the tip/bonus. Also see bereket versin. May be used as shown. For example, our marangoz carpenter, Hilmi Usta, said this to us when we gave him a 10% bonus for the beautiful decorative doors he made for us... Allah bilir. God knows. May be used as shown. · Only God knows for sure. · It's hard to say. · It's not obvious. 32 Allah cezanı (cezasını) versin. May God punish you (him/her/it). Damn you, May be used as shown. Goddamn him/ her, dammit. Allah rahatlık versin. May God provide comfort. Good night. May be used as shown. Allah vermesin. May God not provide. God forbid. May be used as shown. Allah versin. May God provide. May be used as shown. 1. I'm glad everything is fine (about this situation). I feel happy (about it). 2. May God help you. I'm not able to give the alms you wish (Said to a beggar when you don't give him/her sth). Allah'ın binasını yıkmak to demolish God's building to kill yourself or someone else Allah'ın günü God's day everyday, any day (it is said that all days 'belong' to God) Allah'ını seven tutmasın. Let not the lover of God [try to] restrain. May be used as shown. If you love your God, then don't try to stop me. (This is said angrily by sb about to take drastic action.) Allah'ın günü aynı şeyleri söyledi durdu. He stopped and said the same things every day. 33 Allah'a bir can borcu olmak to owe only a soul or a life to God to not owe 'anyone' [anything] -- other than God, for the life he's given Allah'a ısmarladık. We commend you to the care of God. idiom used to say 'Good-bye' -- by the person leaving a location May be used as shown. altı kaval, üstü Şişhane bottom is shepherd's pipe, top is Şişhane (a section of İstanbul) odd-looking having an outlandish look -used mostly when speaking about dress, clothing, attire Altı kaval üstü şişhane diye ifade olunabilecek bir kıyafet ne millidir ne de beynelmileldir. It was an outfit that had an outlandish appearance (..that could be described as 'oddlooking'), neither national nor international [in style]). Note Şişhane is no longer capitalized in this idiom, as being accepted in the vernacular. altından çapanoğlu çıkmak · to meet with possible danger in dirty business Note Over · for events to time, the 'Çapanoğlu' family take an unexpected bad turn name (when used in this id- · to have a iom) has lost its difficulty arise, to have a snag 'Proper Name' in plans status and is, therefore, no longer capitalized... for 'Çapanoğlu' to pop up Bunun altından çapanoğlu çıkmasın. Will this [activity] get us in trouble. See The Best of the Idiom Stories too. 34 altından kalkamamak to be unable to get up from underneath Altından ne çıkacak It's not known what will bilinmez. emerge from underneath. 1. to be unable to carry (sth) through to completition 2. not to be able to protect oneself (from a difficulty) Gül, ikinci tezkerenin altından kalkamayacağını söyleseydi, üzerimize düşeni yapardık. If [then Prime Minister] Gül had said that he couldn't complete [parliamentary passage of] the second [US troops] residencepermission, we [the Turkish military] would have stepped in to do our part. The final result May be used as shown. is uncertain. Amma yaptın (ha). · But, you did. · How you (over) did it. ana avrat dümdüz gitmek to go straight to swear a blue forward, includ- streak ing mother and wife · Adam, hepimize ana avrat dümdüz gitti. That guy...He swore at all of us. · Adam hepimize ana avrat dümdüz gitmesin mi. Would you believe how he (that guy) swore at all of us. anadan doğma as born from stark naked [his/her] mother This idiom is used for male or female genders also see Adembaba. Halen yaz mevsiminin sürdüğü şehirde kimse mankenin anadan doğma olduğunu fark etmedi. No one in the city noticed the com- Also see anadan üryan. Do you really expect me to believe that. May be used as shown. 35 plete nakedness of the model, during the (then) present summer season. naked as [born] from [his/her] mother stark naked anafora konmak to alight in a whirlpool · to get sth for nothing · for extra profit to fall into your hand anafordan from the whirlpool · from illicit gain · improperly or without effort anası danası mother (cow) and her calf his mother and the rest of whole family Anasını satayım. · Let's sell his mother. · Let [me] sell (his/her/its) mother. · Oh, what the May be used as shown. hell... It's not that important. · What will be, will be. · Damn it. anadan üryan Also see anadan doğma. This idiom may be used for either male or female genders also see Adembaba. İspanya'nın Barcelona şehrinde 7 bin kişi anadan üryan soyunup yol ortasına uzanarak Amerikalı fotoğrafçı Spencer Tunick'e poz verdi. In the city of Barcelona Spain, 7 thousand people undressed stark naked, stretching out in the middle of the road, and gave American photographer Spencer Tunick a pose. Anası danası içeriye doldular. His whole family filled up the entire [interior] space. 36 anasını sattığım …[the one] whose mother I sold · (that) damned thing. · damn. anasının gözü his/her mother's · the most [deeye ceitfully] intelligent one in the family · very intelligent · clever · tricky · self seeking · sly, shifty Anasının gözüdür o, işini bilir. She's clever, she knows her business. Anladı isem Arap olayım. Let me be a [black African] Arab, if I understand [that/it]. · I don't understand [it] at all. · I'll be damned if I understand it. May be used as shown. Arama... Don't seek. · It's too much to expect. · Never mind. Forget it. May be used as shown. Aramakla bulunmaz. You don't find [it if] you look for it. It is/was very lucky. May be used as shown. Arap olayım. …[Then] let me I swear that… be a [black African] Arab. Casus değilse Arap olayım. I swear that he's a spy (If he's not a spy, then let me be a [black African] Arab). arapsaçına dönmek to turn to Arabhair AKP'lilerin, DYP'yi Meclis'e sokmamak için Yüksek Seçim Kurulu'na baskı yaptığı ileri sürüldü. Sandalye sayısı azalacak AKP'lilerin to turn into a mess, become thoroughly confused 37 Her şey arapsaçına döner, şeklinde kulis yaptığı belirtildi. Everything will turn into a mess. Arkadaş değil, arka Not a friend, taşı. just a backload of stones... He's supposed to be a friend but all he does is cause me worry, pain, and injury. May be used as shown. Arkasında yumurta There's no egg basket behind küfesi yok ya. him. [Of Also seen as course, he/she's not carrying a Sırtında yumurta basketful of küfesi yok ya. eggs on his/her back.] He'll reverse direction, change his mind, or break his word anytime it suits him. Şimdi de tersini söylüyor, arkasında yumurta küfesi yok ya. Now he's saying the reverse [of what he said before], he breaks his word whenever it suits his purpose. 38 arasından su sızmamak for water not to trickle between for there to be a close friendship between Tayyip bey ile Adnan bey arasından su sızmıyor. There is a close friendship between Tayyip bey and Adnan bey. (Water doesn't trickle between Prime Minister Tayyip Erdoğan and the entertainer Adnan Şenses.) askıya almak to take to the hanger 1. to temporarily suspend, stop, or delay (sth) 2. to prop up (a building) temporarily (for repairs) 3. to lift (a sunken or disabled ship) by lines (from other ships) İngiltere-Kenya uçak seferlerini askıya alırken, Avustralya ve Yeni Zelanda da vatandaşlarını Güneydoğu Asya'ya gitmemeleri konusunda uyardı. After [commercial] flights between the UK and Kenya were temporarily suspended, Australia and New Zealand warned their citizens not to travel to Southeast Asia. aslan sütü lion's milk rakı, the Turkish national alcoholic drink Astığı astık, kestiği kestik. Hanged is the one she says 'hang', cut is the one she says 'cut'. [We hang what he/she wants to hang, we cut what he/she wants to cut.] · What she says goes. · Nobody can object to what he says/does. · She doesn't have to account to anyone for what she does. May be used as shown. 39 Aşağı tükürsem sakal, yukarı tükürsem bıyık. May be used as shown. · I'm torn between two sides or situations. · I can't decide in favor of one thing without jeopardizing the other. · I'm faced with an impossible choice. aşağılık duygusu (kompleksi) vulgar feeling (complex) an inferiority complex aşık atmak/ oynamak to throw or play to rival, comknucklebones pete with, vie with (a superior) Note Though the spelling is nearly the same, the first word of this idiom is not âşık. Şarkıcı Petek Dinçöz Hülya'yla aşık atmam. Ben kimse ile gereksiz yere polemiğe girmek istemiyorum demiş. Singer Petek Dinçöz said, I'm not competing with Hülya [Avşar]. I don't want to get involved in an unnecessary controversy with anyone. aşk çekmek to pull love to suffer the pangs of love aşkolsun let be love · Well done. · Shame on you. Don't be that way. at koşturmak to let a horse run about This may have Yeterli paran var mı a variety of yok mu demeden omeanings such nunla at koşturmaya Similar to See durdu durdu (da) for an example sentence. 40 sidik yarıştırmak. as · to 'chase rainbows' · try to emulate çalışıyorsun. Although you don't have enough money, you're trying to emulate her. for the fire to spread to the chimney · a situation is dangerous, and has taken a turn for the worse · for things to get out of control · to fall in love with sb Ateş bacayı sarmadan gerekli önlemleri almalıyız, yoksa iş işten geçer. If we don't want things to get out of control, we have to take the necessary precautions -- or else this [problem] is going to spread from job to job. ateş pahası (pahasını) fire price very expensive Avrupa malı bir gömlek almak istedim, baktım ki ateş pahasına vazgeçtim. I wanted to buy a European-made shirt, but I had a look, saw that they were very expensive, and gave up (the idea). ateş püskürmek to spray fire from one's mouth to spit fire (at) Geçen hafta 'altın vube very angry ruş' yaparak öldüğü (with) iddia edilen Yıldız Tilbe, bu habere ateş püskürdü. Yıldız Tilbe got extremely angry when she heard the news that claimed she had died last week from a 'golden hit' drug-overdose. atı alan Üsküdar'ı geçti. The one who took the horse has (already) · The opportu- Bırak peşini. Atı alan nity at hand, is Üsküdar'ı geçti. Stop lost. persisting. It's over – ateş bacayı (saçağı) sarmak Also seen as alev saçağı sarmak. 41 passed Üsküdar [aka Scutari, a section of İstanbul, on the Asian side]. · It's too late we lost our chance. now (to rectify it). · There's nothing more that can be done. the one who A person can goes to the hunt fall into his is trapped own trap. Mehmet Ağar, Orman Yasası referandumu konusunda, geçmişten örnekler verdi ve 'Her seferinde ava gidenler avlandı' diyerek, AKP'nin referendum-da beklediği sonucu alamayacağını savundu. avucunu yala lick your paw, lick your palm · to not expect anything · to be left empty handed · to not hope for anything Sürekli çalışmazsan sınavı kazanamaz, avucunu yalarsın sonra. If you don't study diligently [continuously], you won't pass the exam and you'll be left with nothing. ayağa kaldırmak to elevate foot · to excite, arouse (a group) Belediye başkanının haberi şehri ayağa kaldırmıştı. The ava giden avalır Note Serves both as an idiom and a proverb. 42 · to incite, stir mayor's news incited up a (group) to the village to the point rebellion of rebellion. Lengthen your Ayağını yorganına (yorgana) göre uzat. foot according to your quilt. Note Serves both as an idiom and a proverb. · Live within the limit of your income. · Live according to your means. Ayağını yorgana göre uzat diyorsun ama durmadan yorganını kısaltıyorsun. You say [that I must] Live within the limit of my income, but then you keep on reducing my limit. to put a watermelon skin under sb's foot · to cause sb's downfall, to cause sb to be ousted from office · to lay a trap for sb, to intrigue against sb Yerini alacağımdan çekiniyor, bunun için de ayağımın altına karpuz kabuğu koymaya çalışıyordu. She's afraid I'll take her place, so she's trying to trip me up. ayağının altına karpuz kabuğu koymak See The Best of the Idiom Stories too. to throw feet to make a fool out of ayazda kalmak to remain in the cold · to end up getting nothing · to go home empty-handed · to lose out · to be left out in the cold Ayıkla pirincin taşını. Pick [separate] the stones from the rice. · What a mess. · How am I going to do this. · This business ayak atmak Similar to numara yapmak. Hiç kimse bana böyle ayaklar atamaz. Nobody can do this to me (make a fool of me). Vaktinde önlem almadın şimdi ayıkla pirincin taşını. You didn't take action in time, now this business 43 is messed up, so get out of it if you can. is in a mess. · I'm sorry, but May be used as shown. I have to say this, though it may seem disrespectful... · Excuse me for saying so, but… · Excuse the expression, but… Ayıptır söylemesi (ama)... Saying may be a shame (but)... [It may be improper to say (but)...] aynı tüfeğin demirinden from the iron of · two physical the same gun… things that share the same characteristic · two situations or things of a negative nature that resemble each other Bizim evdeki maşa da aynı tüfeğin demirinden galiba, ne zaman öfkelenip fırlatsam daima benim avradı topuğundan vuruyorum, demiş. We have a pair of tongs at home that's probably made from the same material, because every time I get angry and throw it at my wife I hit her right in the heel. he said. See The Best of the Idiom Stories too. ayvayı yemek to eat a quince (fruit) · be in trouble · be done for · for one's goose to be cooked Beklediğimiz para yarın da gelmezse ayvayı yedik demektir. If the money we expect doesn't arrive by tomorrow, it'll mean our goose is cooked. 44 az buçuk small and a half · scanty, hardly enough, very little, somewhat Senin bu konuda az buçuk deneyimin de vardır. You have very little experience with this subject. az buz olmamak/değil to not be small ice to be of no small matter, to be a significant amount Az buz değil, belki bir ton şeker vardı mutfakta. It's no small matter, there must be a ton of sugar in the kitchen. Az değil (o kişi). (That person...) He's not small. · Just because May be used as shown. that person is quiet, it doesn't mean he doesn't know his job In fact, he's a nice guy, quite intelligent and competent. · He's quite different than what he seems to be. az kaldı (az kalsın) [a] little remained (let a little remain) [for a job to be] almost, nearly [done, finished] color bar color bar color bar color bar color bar color bar Az kalsın unutuyordum evin anhtarını aldınız mı. I almost forgot did you take the house key. 45 Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter B The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning Comments and Examples baba adam father man old, mature, good hearted, pleasant appearance Çetin Bey baba adamdır, elinden geldiğince herkese iyilik eder, yardımını esirgemez. Çetin Bey is a fine old fella, when it's within his power he'll do you a favor, he never withholds his help. baba ocağı father hearth · home · family home · home place Baba ocağını bırakıp gitsen iyi olur. You had better leave and go from your home. babasının oğlu (he is his) fa- same meaning ther's son Her hali babası gibi. Elbette, babasının oğlu. He is like his father in every situation. Of course, he's his father's son. bacak kadar as much as a leg · tiny, small child, very short person · a woman sitting revealingly with crossed legs O bacak kadar çocuk kamyonu sürüyor. That tiny kid drives a truck. bahar havası palavra spring air pa- overly-optimistic palaver laver intended to mislead or deceive Giyim Sanayicileri Derneği Başkan Umut Oran, 'İktidarın bahar havası palavra' dedi. The Clothing Industries Association's President Umut Oran said that 46 what Government officials are saying is empty talk intended to mislead (the public). It is said Baki kalan kubbede bir hoş that... the thing that seda imiş. survives is a pleasant sound in the dome. baklayı ağzından çıkarmak Also see ağzından baklayı çıkarmak. bal gibi Also see pek ala. It's better to be remembered for the good words you've written or spoken (or for the good deeds you've done), than for the bad… May be used as shown -- in a situation where sb has just uttered an angry or hateful oath... to remove the broad bean from the mouth · to lose patience and start saying things that one previously kept to oneself · to be taken unawares and to say quickly what one had intended to keep secret · to let the cat out of the bag · to spill the beans · to come clean · Alman liderler baklayı ağızlarından çıkardı Dürüst olalım, sizi tam üye yapamayız. German leaders let the cat out of the bag Let's be honest, we (ie., EU) are not going to make you [ie., Turkey] a full [European Union] member. · Bırak muamma konuşmayı. Çıkar ağzından baklayı. Bahtımız aydınlanıversin. Quit beating around the bush. Spill the beans. Tell us about our good fortune quickly. like honey · like honey, very sweet, very well · without a hitch, smoothly, easily Bu, bal gibi goldü, hakem saymadı. It was easily a goal, but the referee didn't count it. 47 balık ağaca/kavağa çıkınca when fish climb [poplar] trees · Never It's impossible for the thing in question to happen. · Like the Americanism, ‘When pigs fly.' Balık kavağa çıkarsa onun da dedikleri olur. What he says will never happen (unless fish climb poplar trees). Balık baştan kokar. Fish smells from the head. Corruption starts at the top. Maybe used as shown. in fish meat · a nicely proportioned (neither thin nor fat) woman · body with nice measurements Balık etinde biridir giysileri pek yakışıyor. She's got a nice body her clothes look good on her. Note Serves both as an idiom and a proverb. balık etinde AA adds An English-speaking western person might consider balık etinde to be a tad on the plump side, though not at all fat. You know, most Turks (mostly *male* Turks, that is) consider only 'fish meaty' women to be physically perfect. The western ideal female figure is a few centimeters on the skinny side of 'balik etinde', if you know what I mean... bam teline basmak to press the low string on the lute · to vex or annoy · to upset sb by what you do or say on a sensitive subject · to touch/press a Gençlerin giyimini beğendiğimi söylemekle meğer kadının bam teline basmışım. 48 bana göre, hava according to me, the hoş weather's fine sore spot · to press a (raw) nerve By saying that I like young people's fashion, I'm touching that woman's sore spot. · I'm agreeable. · Whatever happens, it doesn't matter to me. · I don't mind. İstediğin gibi davran, sen bilirsin bana göre hava hoş. Do what you want to do, as you wish, I don't mind. bardağı taşırmak to overflow the glass to cause (sb) to run out of patience Son sözü bardağı taşırdı. The last remark made me lose my patience. barut fıçısı gunpowder barrel · powder keg · where strife and trouble can break out Tarafların hızla silahlanması Balkanlar'ı barut fıçısı yaptı. Arming the sides with weapons made the Balkans a powder-keg. baston yutmuş gibi like (a per· standing or walking son who) very erect swallowed a · as stiff as a poker walking cane Korse takmış adam baston yutmuş gibi yürüyor. The man wearing the corset walks as stiff as a poker. baş aşağı head down upside down Senin teknenin alemi baş aşağı olmuştu. Ben yine kaldırıp yerine diktim. Your flag was upside down. I got up and put it back in place again. baş göz etmek to do head eye to marry off Komşumuz kızlarını baş göz etti. Our neighbors married off their daughter. 49 baş tacı etmek to do head crown başı bağlı olmak (for) head · to be tied down (oneself) to · to be dependent be connected · to be engaged Bir yere gidemiyor başı bağlıdır. He doesn't go anywhere, he's tied down. başı dara düşmek (for) head (oneself) to fall narrow · to get into trouble · find oneself in a difficult situation · to be without money Başımız dara düşünce akrabalarımız yardımımıza koşar. When we got into trouble our relatives ran to help us. · to be without trouble, at ease, peaceful · to be carefree, free of grief, tranquil İşlerimi düzene koydum başım dinçtir. I put my work in order and I don't have a care in the world. başı dinç olmak (for) head (oneself) to be energetic and vigorous to treat sb with great respect and affection For the wrong başı göğe ermek (for) head (oneself) to reasons attain heaven · to be overjoyed · to find happiness Biz büyüklerimizi baş tacı ederiz. We respect and love our elders. Mehmet'in yerine geçtin de başın göğe erdi mi. And, were you happy to have usurped Mehmet's position. başı için for the head for the sake of (used when imploring) Sevdiklerinin başı için bu işimi yapıver. Do this business quickly for the sake of your loved ones. başı kazan olmak (for) head to be cauldron to have one's head throb from noise or confusion Sınıftaki gürültüden başım kazan oldu. Because of the noise in the class my head throbbed. başın(ız) sağ ol- · Literally, ‘let your sun Please accept my This is the first thing condolences. (said to you say to a grieving 50 head be healthy' · Figuratively, ‘may your life be spared' a grieving person upon the death of loved one) survivor when a member of his/her family (or a close friend) passes away. And, no more than this is necessary. başına çorap örmek to knit a sock for the head · to plot against sb · to prepare a plan to trap sb · get sb into trouble Bu adam onun başına çorap örebilir dikkatli olmalısın. This man can make trouble for him/her he/she must be careful. başına devlet kuşu konmak (for) the state bird to land on your head · to have a stroke of luck · to attain happiness · to win a prize or the lotto Ahmet Ağabey'in başına devlet kuşu kondu. Older brother Ahmet had a stroke of good luck. başına dünyayı dar etmek to make the world narrow on somone's head to make life miserable for sb Seninle buluşup Hayreddin'in başına dünyayı dar edelim. Let's get together and make Hayreddin's life miserable. başına ekşimek to turn sour on the head · to be a burden (to) · to be a permanent and unwelcome nuisance Bu işi bitiriverelim ikide bir gelip başımıza ekşimesin. Let's finish this work quickly then it won't constantly come back and burden us. başına gelenler things coming to your head unpleasant things (that happen to you) Başına gelenleri anlattı. He told us about the bad things that had happened to him. başına gelmek to come to your head (for sth unpleasant) to Ünlü sanatçı Gülben happen (to) Ergen'in başına gelenler, aslında 51 herkesin başına gelebilir. The unpleasant things that happened to famous performer Gülben Ergen, can actually happen to anyone. to cause trouble to başına iş açmak to open (bring) a job (getirmek) on your head · he/she is a pushover · he/she is so agreeable that anyone can walk right over them · he/she is simpleminded Kendi halinde biridir başına vur, lokmasını ağzından al. He's quite simpleminded, anyone can take advantage of him. (... [you] can bop him on the head and take the food right out of his mouth.) başında kavak yeli esmek (for) the · to live a problemwind to blow less carefree life a poplar tree · to be day-dreaming on one's head · Gençliğinde başında kavak yelleri esiyormuş. When she was young, she lived a carefree life. · Başında kavak yellerin estiği yıllardı, ne iş düşünürdü, ne güç. For years he lived a carefree life, never thinking of work, or difficulty. başından aşağı kaynar sular dokülmek (for) boiling water to pour from your head · Onu görünce başımdan aşağı kaynar sular döküldü. When I saw him, I broke into a hot sweat. · Yalanımı yakalay- başına vur, lokmasını ağzından al. hit his/her mouth, take his/her food Durup dururken başımıza iş açtık. Suddenly we got into trouble. Note Often seen as Ensesine vur, lokmasını al. · (in an embarrassing or tiresome situation) to sweat hotly · to be shocked about sth 52 ınca başımdan aşağı kaynar sular dökülüyor gibi oldu. When she/he caught me in my lie, it was like boiling water pored from my head. batağa saplanmak to be stuck · to get oneself to the swamp trapped in a blind alley · to get oneself into a situation from which one can not extricate oneself · to be up the creek in a big way · to be caught in a quagmire · for a project to come a cropper, fail According to a public opinion poll conducted by American Newsweek Magazine, 70 percent of the American people hold the view that, the American occupation army (which is) in Iraq will be caught in a quagmire. battı balık yan gider the fish has sunk and now swims sideways the situation is in such a mess that there's no use trying to do anything about it İşin sonundan umutsuzum battı balık yan gider. I'm hopeless that you'll complete your job, it's in such a mess it can't be fixed. bayram değil (seyran değil eniştem beni niye öptü.) it's not festival time, it's not a pleasure trip, [so] why did my brother-in- There must be sth be- Bayram değil, seyran hind this… değil Avrupalılar bize durup dururken çok anlayışlı davrandılar. There must be something behind this 53 law kiss me. - suddenly the Europeans are treating us with intelligence. bedava sirke baldan tatlıdır free vinegar is sweeter than honey anything you can get for free is better than sth you have to pay for... May be used as shown. bela okumak to read trouble to curse Marianne Miranda'ya bela okumaya başladı. Marianne began cursing Miranda. Ben sana hayran, sen cama tırman. I admire you, you climb glass. · this is a one-sided love · love should not be one-sided Onu çok seviyor ama sevgisine karşılık bulamıyor ben sana hayran, sen cama tırman. She loves him a lot, but she doesn't get a loving response. It's a one-sided love. Note Depending on the way this expression is used, it can also have a sexually suggestive meaning because 'cama tırmanmak' (to climb glass) may also be used to describe 'uncontrolled sexual desire'. ben seninle çok ekmek yedim. I've eaten a lot of bread with you. Bende o göz var Is there that eye on me. mı. We've been through a Ben seninle çok eklot together. mek yedim. Öldürürsem senin gibi nankör olurum. We've been through a lot together. Beni kandırmaya çalışıyorlar bende o göz var mı. They're trying to fool me do I look so 54 innocent that I'd believe them. Benden günah gitti. Sin went from me. benimkinin dağarcığındaki in the leather to my knowledge to Ne 'Canım' ne bag that is my mind in my opin- 'Aşkım' ne 'Yavrum' mine ion ne 'Güzelim' ne 'Fıstık'. Benimkinin dağarcığındaki en sıcak ve romantik kelime Dingil'. It's not 'My dear' nor 'My love' nor 'My darling' nor 'My beauty' nor 'My shapely one'. To my mind, the most passionate and romantic [slang] word is 'Axle'. 1. ‘may God give abundance, Also see plenty' 1. ‘may God Allah give you inbereket versin. crease' 2. bereketini 2. ‘may you see the ingör crease' 1. bereket versin Don't blame me. 1. The figurative meaning usually carries directly over from the literal. But, in some cases, there is the additional meaning of, Thank God that all is well . The phrase may be said by you to sb who has given you a payment, tip, or bonus... 2. ...in which case their response is, usually, bereketini gör. Gereken uyarıyı yaptım kendisi bilir benden günah gitti. I gave the necessary warning he himself knows it so don't blame me. Bereket versin arabamız sigortalıydı yoksa perişan olmuştuk. Thank God that our car was insured otherwise we'd be in a pickle. 55 beş para etmez five money doesn't do [sth that is] utterly worthless beş paralık etmek to do five money's worth to expose one's shameful secrets beş paralık olmak to be five money's worth to have one's shameful secrets exposed beş parasız five moneyless penniless beterin beteri worse of worse the very worst possible thing Beterin beteri var Allah beterinden saklasın. This is the very worst possible situation may God hide you from [even] worse. bıçak altına yatmak to lie down under the knife to have an operation Ilk kez bıçak altına yattığı için çok zayıf düşmüş. He lost a lot of weight due to his first operation. bıçak kemiğe dayanmak to lean on a knife to the bone to get to be unendurable Bıçak kemiğe dayandı, artık söylenmesi gerekeni söyleriz. It's getting to be unendurable, from now on we're going to say what needs to be said. bıyığı terlemek for the mustache to sweat (for a boy) to have peach fuzz beginning to grow on the upper lip Uzun boylu, güzel yüzlü, bıyıkları yeni terlemiş bir gençti. He was a young fella with peach fuzz on his upper lip -- tall, with a handsome face. bıyık burmak to twist the mustache to try to make others Daha dünkü çocuk, karşımıza geçmiş, 56 believe in one's bravery and/or manliness bıyık buruyor. Since yesterday, the kid has been confronting us, trying to convince us of his manliness. bildiğiniz (gibi) yapmak to do what · to ignore advice you know, to · do sth one's own do as you way know Ocağımızın Midilli'de tütmesini isterdim. Anlıyorum ki sizin talihiniz denizlerde yazılmış. Bildiğiniz gibi yapın. I had wanted you to take over my pottery business in Midilli. But I now understand that your fate is written on the seas. Follow your own dream. bin dereden su getirmek to bring water from a thousand brooks See kırk dereden, etc. See example sentence at kırk dereden, etc. · to cut the branch you're sitting on · to be responsible for creating your own problems İnsanlar çevreyi kirleterek bindikleri dalı kesiyorlar. People who foul the environment are creating problems for everyone, themselves included. · to have one foot in the grave · to be at the age of dying Bizim bir ayağımız çukurda artık, oğul -İnşallah büyür aileye, benim yerime sen bakarsın. I (royal 'we') have got one foot in the grave, son -hopefully you'll be head of the family, bindiği dalı kes- to cut the branch on mek which you are mounted bir ayağı çukurda (olmak) to be one foot in the hole 57 and in my place, you'll look after them. bir baltaya sap olmak to be a handle to an ax to have a job, be employed A oğlum, kocaman oldun artık bir baltaya sap ol, bir iş yap. Ah son, you're grown now it's time you get a job and do some work. bir çuval inciri berbat etmek to ruin a sack of figs · to foul things up, but good · to upset an activity that was going well Son söylediğin sözlerle bir çuval inciri berbat ettin. By what you just said, you really screwed up the works. bir dediğini iki etmemek to not do two to do everything one (of sth) asks for to fulfill about which every desire of one was said Dubaili şeyh sevgilisiyle ülke ülke dolaşan Ebru Şancı, Artık Türkiye'ye dönmem, sevgilimle çok mutluyum. Bir dediğimi iki etmiyor dedi. Ebru Şancı (who roams from country to country with her lover, a sheik from Dubai) said, I won't return to Turkey any more, I'm very happy with my lover. He fulfills my every desire. not to have a · to have no wealth planted tree nor property · not to own land or home Dünyada bir dikili ağacım yok, diye sızlanıyor. I'm poor and have no place to live in this world, he complained. Also seen as bir dediği iki edilmemek/ olmamak. bir dikili ağacı olmamak bir eli yağda bir one hand in butter, one eli balda · to want for nothing · to be well off Her istediği oluyor, bir eli yağda, bir eli 58 hand in honey · to be 'living in clover' balda yaşıyor. She's got all she wants one hand in honey, the other in butter. bir işin püf noktası See püf noktası. bir kaşık suda boğmak to drown in a to be ready to 'kill' on Eski ortağına çok spoonful of the slightest pretext kızıyor bulsa bir kawater şık suda boğacak. He was very angry with his old partner. If he found him he would have killed him. bir sıçrarsın çekirge, iki sıçrarsın çekirge, üçüncüde ele geçersin çekirge let the grass- You can't always hopper jump trust to luck. once, even twice the third time he'll be captured Also seen shortened as çekirge üç kez sıçramadı. · O kadar çapkındı ki, aynı anda birkaç kızla flört ediyordu. Ama sonunda bir sıçrarsın çekirge, iki sıçrarsın çekirge, üçüncüde ele geçersin çekirge misali yakalandı ve bütün kız arkadaşlarını kaybetti. He was such a womanizer, he was flirting with several girls at the same time. But he couldn't always trust his luck, for when they found out -- he lost all his girl friends. · Çekirge üç kez sıçramadı. Uluslararası uyuşturucu kaçakçısı Tilki Selim'i başta Amerika olmak üzere birçok avrupa ülkesi fıldır fıldır arıyordu 59 ama işi Türk polisi bitirdi. Headline His luck ran out. With America in the lead, several European countries have been hunting long and hard for the international drug fugitive 'Selim the Fox', but the Turkish police got the job done. See The Best of the Idiom Stories too. bir sıkımlık canı olmak to have one squeeze's worth of life bir tahtası eksik one plank missing bir yastıkta kocamak to age on a pillow bir yaşıma daha I entered another age of girdim mine · to be very frail · to be such a 'pipsqueak' that anyone can easily beat up Bir sıkımlık canı var, herkese kafa tutuyor. He is such a weakling but (even so) he challenges everyone. derisively… (sb) who's mind is not right, who has a 'screw loose', who's not 'all there' Böyle ölçüsüz davranan insanın, bir tahtası eksik olsa gerekir. A person who acts in such a reckless way, must have one plank missing. for a husband and wife to live a long time together Mutluluklar dileriz, bir yastıkta kocayın, dedim. I said, we wish you happiness and a long life together. · I'm very much surprised. · we live and learn A, bir yaşıma daha girdim. Çocuk traktörü sürüyor. Oh. What a surprise. There's a young child driving that tractor. 60 birbirine girmek to enter each other 1. to start (physically) fighting each other to lay into each other 2. to quarrel bitterly, to rip into each other 3. to crash into each other Başbakan Silvio Berlusconi'nin Almanya'nın AB temsilcisini Nazi'likle suçlaması yüzünden Almanya ile İtalya birbirine girdi. Because of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's accusations of Nazism aimed at the German Representative to the EU, Germany and Italy have quarreled bitterly. biri eşikte, bir(i) beşikte one on the threshold, one in the cradle they (the children) are still quite young Çocukları pek küçük biri eşikte, bir(i) beşikte. The children are very small, they are still quite young. Bismillâhirrahmânirrahim · In the name of God, the compassionate, the merciful · In the name of God, the most gracious, most merciful Same meaning… This 'formula' is used as the introduction to almost anything that has a religious context. It may be the first words of a book about a religious subject, the beginning of a religious speech, the opening of a written public announcement about sth religious, etc. It opens every 'sura' (chapter) of the Koran. Actually (ÜÖ assures us), It is also very common to say This single, long Arabic word is referred to by some as the 'Islamic formula' (as opposed to the 'creed' that states, 'There is but one God and Muhammad is his Prophet. '). 61 this phrase before starting many actions other than religious ones, like starting a journey, starting to eat -- in fact almost starting anything. bit yeniği (a) louse bite · a job that doesn't seem right · a direction that doesn't inspire trust Bu işte bir bit yeniği var, ben kuşkuluyum. Something doesn't seem right in this business, I'm suspicious about it. bol bol plentiful plentiful · amply abundantly generously · a full sth a large sth a lot of sth Ali Babacan, Erkenden evime gidip bol bol yemek yiyorum diye söyledi. [Minister of State] Ali Babacan said, I'm going home early and eating a large meal. borusu ötmek to toot a horn · to have authority, be influential · to 'call the shots' Hamdi Beyin bu mahallede borusu öter. In this district, Hamdi Bey calls the shots. boşuna uğraşmak to strive use- to waste time and/or lessly effort Gel... Boşuna uğraşma. Sesimizi biraz zor duyururuz, bunun yanında. Come… Don't waste your time. Next to him, it'll be a little hard to hear our voices. · boynuzlu · boynuz takmak · antlered · to attach antlers Ahlâksız, bir başka adamla aldatarak kocasına boynuzlu dedirtti. How rude. The husband being · cuckolded · [for a husband] to be cuckolded 62 cheated by another man is said to be 'cuckolded'. boyu boyuna huyu huyuna uymak to fit length to length temperment to temperment · suitable, good match · for two people to be in good balance with one another to take a · to learn painfully boyunun ölçüsünü almak measurement about your shortof your size comings/inadequacies · to 'measure up', unfavorably · to be disappointed at sb's indifference · to be unsuccessful, against hope, at what you attempt Boyu boyuna huyu huyuna uyan biri ile evlendi. She married someone who is suitable to her temperament. Sen de yap, sen de boyunun ölçüsünü al da, bu işin öyle kolay olmadığını anla. This job isn't so easy. You try it too, and see how you measure up, then you'll know. boyun eğmek to bend neck · to submit (to sb) · Kimseye boyun eğ· to humiliate oneself medi. He didn't bow down to anyone. · Kaldı ki açık denizler yıllanmış gemicilere bile boyun eğdirir. We stayed like that (in the open sea) for a long time, open seas make even the most experienced sailors bow down. bozguna uğramak to visit defeat · to be routed (in a battle) · to be defeated Tunus askerleri bozguna uğradı bir çil yavrusu gibi dağıldı. The Tunisian soldiers were routed and were scattered like a covey of birds. 63 bozuk düzen broken order · in a disorderly state, out of order · disorganized, uncoordinated, muddled · wrong laws applied in the society, that make it disorderly Bu bozuk düzeni demokratik yolla düzeltmek gerekir. It's necessary to fix the muddled social order in a democratic way. börtü böcek ... bug · bugs and insects · vermin Yazın ev boş kalınca börtü böcek dolmuş. When the house is empty in summer, it fills up with bugs and insects. in this/that shadow · thanks to this/that [reason] · so, therefore şirket bu sayede ayakta kalabildi. Thanks to this [reason], the corporation was able to survive [...to remain on its feet]. bundan iyisi can sağlığı better than this is good health · this is the best · nothing can surpass this · this is the next best thing to good health En iyi arabayı aldık bundan iyisi can sağlığı. We bought the greatest car nothing can beat it. bundan iyisi Şam'da kayısı better than this is an apricot in Damascus · It doesn't get any better than this... · Nothing (except eating an apricot in Damascus) can surpass this. (And Damascus is noted for great apricots.) May be used as shown. burnu bile kanamamak for the nose not to even bleed to survive a calamity without a scratch... Agır bir kaza geçirdi burnu bile kanamadı. He was in a very serious accident and he survived without a scratch. Note börtü has no meaning except in this idiom. bu sayede Note This idiom means the same as o sayede and nearly the same as sayesinde. 64 burnu büyümek for the nose to grow to become conceited Son günlerde burnu büyüdü kimseye selam bile vermiyor. He's become very conceited in these last days he doesn't even say hello to anyone. burnu düşmek for the nose to fall · to be overcome by a bad odor · to be humbled after being too proud Sokağa dökülen çöplerin kokusundan burnumuz düştü. We were suffocating from the smell of the garbage that was left in the street. for the nose to be in the air to be conceited Burnu havada, kimseye yüz vermiyor. He's conceited, he doesn't pay attention to anyone. for the nose to be on Kaf Mountain to look down on everyone, to be excessively proud Burnu Kaf dağında, çalımından yanına varılmıyor. His nose is on Kaf Mountain, he's unapproachable due to his affected dignity. Also see burnunun direği kırılmak. burnu havada (olmak) Equivalent to burnu büyümek] burnu Kaf dağında (olmak) Note The mythical Kaf Mountain lay just beyond the horizon, at all points on the compass -- surrounding the world. And, it was a cheerless, desolate place. 65 burnu sürtülmek to rub the nose hard to learn a lesson through humiliation Bu acı olaydan sonra burnu sürtüldü. After this event happened, he learned his lesson. burnunda tütmek for smoke to rise in the nose · to have intense longing · to miss a lot Doğduğum yerleri çok özledim burnumda tütüyor. I've missed my birth place a lot I'm longing to see it again. burnundan (fitil fitil) gelmek (for wicks or fuzes) to come from the nose · to suffer so terribly after making a big gain that you wish you'd never had the gain in the first place. · to have sth go terribly wrong -- sth, which should have been very pleasant. Kazandığımız burnumuzdan geldi. We suffered greatly because of our [previous] gains. (Our [previous] gains came from our noses.) to break the nose of sb to humiliate Onun burnunu kırdım artık yüksekten atamaz. I humiliated him, he won't talk so big any more. Also see, fitil fitil burnundan gelmek. burnunu kırmak to be greatly disburnunu sıksan if you squeeze the tressed canı çıkar nose, the life goes out burnunu sokmak to stick or poke the nose to involve oneself in another's affairs Çok üzüntülü görünüyor burnunu sıksan canı çıkacak. She seems very upset if you squeeze her nose her life will go out. Her işe burnunu sokan insanları hiç sevmem. I don't like people who stick their noses into other folks' business, at all. 66 burnunun dibinde at the bottom nearby, very closeby, of the nose very near burnunun direği kırılmak for the nose to feel overcome by a Hastane o kadar pis pole to break bad smell kokuyordu ki burnumun direği kırıldı. The hospital smelled so bad that I was [nearly] suffocated by it. burnunun direği sızlamak for the pole of the nose to ache · to have sad, painful memories of sth or a person · to be painfully sorry for sth Kazanın oluşunu anımsayınca burnunun direği sızlamış. When he (even faintly) remembers how the accident happened, he is racked with sorrow. burnunun ucunu (bile) görememek not to be able to see the end of the nose · to be blind with pride · sth that is very nearby/closeby · sth that will occur very soon · to be dead drunk