The process of weaning can be carried out so that the child himself, with a little encouragement, will choose a new and wider form of pleasure, and so pass lightly through this, the most intense, emotional experience of life. If the change, when its time comes, is violently made, desire will not go forwards to new fields and to wider experience of mind, but backwards to some substitute pleasure of the same type as the one to be surrendered. Thumb-sucking, an obvious substitute, is the commonest. (From Talks to Parents and Teachers by Homer Lane) a) accustoming a baby to food other than its mother's milk b) requiring great care, caution or attention c) connected series of actions d) food e) psychological and emotional part of a person f) ignored g) replace take the place of h) support urging i) change without difficulty (phrase) j) very strong highly felt k) strong wish I) be given up 36 ELS , 1. In the passage, it is emphasized that during the process of weaning A) children generally become very delicate B) parents have difficulty knowing what to feed the child C) the child's capacities go backwards for a while rather than forwards D) the child's interest is centered most intensely in the mother E) the child must be provided with another pleasure so that the adjustment is made easier 2. The writer states that A) it's usually the parent that surrenders to the child's desire for an unpleasant substitute B) when weaning is done forcefully, it's most commonly substituted for by thumb-sucking C) the parent should ask someone more experienced for help during the process of weaning D) the more emotional the child, the more intense his desire for breast-feeding E) the parent should be patient with the child even if he becomes rather irritable 3. The writer points out that though it is virtually always ignored, A) the food the child is given during weaning should be delicious enough to satisfy his appetite B) the spiritual effect of weaning is lifelong C) breast-feeding should be lengthened as long as possible D) the substitute for weaning should be left to the child's choice E) the child shouldn't be forced to develop new capabilities during weaning 1. If you are on a diet, you can saccharin for sugar, but it doesn't taste as nice. 2 operations, such as eye surgery, require the surgeon to have a very steady hand. 3. Having been 4. Last summer, the heat in the south of the country was so for many years, the house was in a very poor condition. that very few of the tourists could bear it. 5. Regular exercise not only maintains the body's fitness, but also looks after the ELS 37 Thus it enlarges brainpower in the same way that other man-made machines enlarge muscle power. Like man, the computer expresses knowledge in terms of symbols man's symbols are letters and numbers, and the machine's symbols are electromagnetic impulses that represent letters and numbers. Although man must usually instruct or program the machine minutely, its chief present advantage is that it can manipulate symbols a million times faster than a man with pencil and paper, and can make calculations in a few minutes that might take man alone a century. An expert has remarked that the difference between doing a calculation by hand and by computer is the difference between having one dollar and having a million. Sometimes the difference is infinite only a computer can calculate swiftly enough to analyze the data from a satellite, or to enable man to control the flight of a missile. a) fundamentally b) something invented for a special purpose c) take in d) change slightly e) make bigger f) intellectual capability g) bodily strength h) as indicated by in units of (phrase) i) in detail j) handle skilfully k) process of finding a result through figures I) a hundred years m) say comment n) without end o) very quickly 38 ELS , 1. Whereas some capacities of the computer are comparable with man's A) B) C) D) E) it still can't respond satisfactorily to the requirements of the modern world the computer uses electromagnetic impulses that stand for letters and numbers there are certain situations which only a computer can handle the computer helps man improve his brainpower rather than his muscle power man has been working on computers in order to increase their storage capacity 2. The writer states that A) B) C) D) E) the way the computer expresses knowledge is similar to man's the capacities of the computer are currently limited to calculating and storing information man should have developed such a miraculous device a century ago the advantages of the computer are infinite scientists are working on a project to develop a computer that will analyze, on its own, the data from a satellite 3. One can conclude from the passage that the computer A) B) C) D) E) will help to increase goodwill between nations is a great time-saver for man, in addition to its other benefits may eliminate the hostile feelings between nations by deterring them from starting wars may give rise to wars between nations by enabling them to control the flight of a missile from a distance is causing unemployment in those countries where it is widely used 1. A lot of people have upon the change in the air quality since the new anti-pollution laws have been implemented. 2. Frozen food, convenience, has a lot to offer, but its nutritive value is open to doubt. 3. His horse-riding accident caused him to dislocate his shoulder however, the physiotherapist was able to 4. I wish someone would invent a it back into place successfully. to do the ironing for me. sighed the tired housewife. 5. Although it is man who invented the computer, no man can the same amount of information as it. ELS 39 r Perhaps more swimmers have been drowned by cramp than by anything else, and only those who have suffered from it can conceive its fatal power. Even good swimmers, when seized with cramp, have been known to sink instantly, overcome with the sudden pain, and nothing can save the victim but the greatest presence of mind. The usual spot where the cramp is felt is the calf of the leg and it sometimes comes with such violence that the muscles are gathered up into knots. There is only one method of proceeding under such circumstances to turn on one's back at once, kick the leg out in the air, disregarding the pain, and rub the spot smartly with one hand, while the other is employed in paddling towards shore. These directions are easy enough to give, but quite difficult to obey cramp seems to deprive the sufferer of all reason for the time, and it seems to overpower him with mingled pain and terror. Therefore, the method of saving a person drowning because of cramp demands great practice. The chief difficulty lies in the fact that a person who cannot swim feels, in deep water, much as if he were falling through air, and consequently clutches instinctively at the nearest object. If he succeeds in grasping the person who is trying to save him, both will probably sink together. Every precaution should be taken to prevent such a misfortune and the drowning man should always be seized from behind and pushed forwards. 40 ELS 1. According to the passage, although the correct course of action for cramp is simple, A) the pain caused by it takes a long time to disappear B) it is clear that few people remember to follow it C) it cannot be applied without the help of another person D) barely anyone has ever survived an attack in water E) it isn't easy to put into practice 2. According to the passage, the force of cramp is so great that A) it is hopeless to try and save a victim B) only previous victims can imagine it C) rubbing the spot affected is useless D) most people affected never go swimming again E) it is impossible to move once affected 3. The author warns readers that A) one should not attempt to help someone struck by cramp B) rescuers should approach a victim head-on C) suffering cramp while swimming is almost always fatal D) rescuers can be dragged down with the victim E) once struck with cramp while swimming, the person must stay still and wait for assistance 1. We have been of sleep for the past two nights because our baby has been unwell. 2. It's not possible to the thrill of skiing without trying it for yourself. 3. Despite the pain from his broken ankle, the mountaineer had the to light a fire so that he could be spotted by the rescue helicopter. 4. Sarah's joy at being offered a transfer to the Swiss branch of the bank was with sadness because she knew she would have to leave all her friends at the office. 5. After the two brothers returned home from school on that snowy night, their mother their feet until the blood started to flow again and their frozen feet started to warm up. In our own culture, only very young boys may be allowed to play with their sisters' dolls occasionally without ridicule or remonstrance. And even they are rarely given dolls of their own, although teddies and stuffed animals may be allowed. A seven-year-old boy who enjoys tucking teddies up in cots is likely to be ridiculed if he does it too often. Similarly, girls do enjoy playing with toy cars and train sets, but are rarely given these as presents. Older girls particularly are discouraged from playing boisterous games and may be labelled torn-boys if they do not conform to the quieter, gentler, less aggressive activities expected of them. Boys who abstain from rough games, or prefer reading or playing the piano are in danger of being labelled sissy . adapt oneself to (phrasal verb) m) hold oneself back n) boy who behaves like a girl 42 ELS 1. It's stated in the passage that A) babies are born with certain tendencies depending on their sexes B) the child's sex is taken into consideration when it is presented with a toy C) there must be certain games which both boys and girls can play together D) it's cruel to call a child a torn-boy or a sissy when it doesn't conform to the norms of society E) boisterous or aggressive games are considered suitable for neither gender 2. According to the writer, the tendency that dominates society is that A) children should be allowed to play with whatever toy they like B) the discrimination against toys regarded as suitable for boys or girls only increases the child's interest in them C) the child should be discouraged from playing with toys special to the other sex, without the parents being too repressive D) the child should be directed from an early age to behave in accordance with its own sex E) such activities as reading and playing the piano should be common to both genders 3. We can conclude from the passage that A) psychologists are attempting to eliminate sex discrimination in society B) girls aren't given toy cars and train sets as presents, but anyway, they instinctively haven't much interest in them C) the child's choice in games and toys is directed according to the norms of society rather than D) the child only grows interested in the toys belonging to the opposite sex when there is a E) if the child's attention weren't drawn to such discrimination through prohibitions, he would to his interests member of that sex in his or her vicinity instinctively behave suitably for his own gender 1. He couldn't agree with any of the political parties at the recent election, so he chose to from voting. 2. I 3. Our parents would like us to how they are, but we don't always agree because we'd rather look and act differently from them. 4. To overcome her fear of water, she 5. You have to be be very dangerous. like to indulge myself with a big bar of chocolate. decided to take a boat trip. careful when using certain cleaning fluids, as they can ELS 43 They are children who have been injured by a mine or an exploding shell, who have been born with deformities, who have caught diseases or who suffer from the after-effects of injuries. A very simple operation can often save them. But there is usually no prospect of such surgery in their own countries, owing to the lack of specialized expertise and technical resources. Faced with this terrible fact, says Professor Alain Deloche, a heart surgeon, a simple idea took root to bring these children to France, to provide them with operations, and then send them home, cured, to their families. To achieve this, continues Professor Deloche, one simply needs to bring into action a series of links in a chain of skills, asking people with all types of expertise to join in. This project has a powerful appeal. Everyone can participate and become a link in the chain. And so, well-known surgeons, the most highly skilled in their fields, operate free of charge in their hospitals throughout France. At the end of the chain, one finds a network of families who take the children in free of charge during their recovery. (From the United Nations' monthly magazine Refugees) put into operation (phrase) j) connection k) take part I) greatly m) without payment (phrase) n) given out of kindness free o) connected system 44 ELS 1. The Chain of Hope is an organization A) B) C) D) E) formed as a result of the appeals of surgeons from under-developed countries which operates throughout the world with surgeons well-known in their fields which deals with the health problems of poor children in France in which every member of society can take part which is trying to improve the quality of health services in poverty-stricken countries 2. The children A) B) C) D) E) 3. We can conclude from the passage that A) B) C) D) E) the speaker Professor Alain Deloche complains about not receiving sufficient support from the community the aim of the organization in the long term is to spread its works to other developed countries as well the children operated on in France are those whose own countries lack the requirements for such operations one has to possess some kind of expertise to become a link in the chain the organization tries to build hospitals throughout France where the most skilled surgeons will perform their operations 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. The film The Elephant Man was a true story based on a man who suffered most of his life because of his physical A lot more money needs to be spent before the rail can be considered truly efficient. The Bosphorus and Fatih Sultan Mehmet bridges are the road between the European and Asian sides of Istanbul. The entrance into mosques in Istanbul is for tourists however, donations towards the upkeep are often given. Many highly educated people have nรถ of employment due to the current economic crisis. ELS 45 His future was uncertain, but he did not believe it could be unhappier than his past. He had grown up in the slums of London's East End and had experienced great poverty. His mother's life had been so hard that she had finally gone mad, and his father had died of drink. Both parents had been on the stage and lived in the hope that they would one day be stars. Their son was determined to succeed where they had failed. By 1914 his optimism and determination had been justified. Charles Chaplin was the most talked-about man in America, the king of silent movies. He was not only admired as a first-class actor and comedian, he was also making his name as a director. How did he reach the top of the film world in such a short time. He was not an instant success. His attempts to copy other slapstick comedians who were popular at that time were a failure. However he gradually began to develop the character of the tramp that will always be connected with his name. He borrowed ideas from many sources and though he stole most of his clothes from other slapstick comedians of the time, he developed his own special mannerisms to go with them. He used his bowler hat to signal secret messages and his walking stick allowed him to cause confusion and punish his enemy from a distance. He got the idea for his famous flat-footed walk from a London taxi driver who had sore feet. b) area in a town or city with dirty, crowded houses and poor living conditions c) state of being poor d) become mentally ill (phrase) e) way of seeing the good things in life confidence in success f) intention to do something without being stopped by anything g) proved to be right h) immediate i) type of boisterous physical comedy, often involving accidents j) person with no home or job and very little money and who travels about on foot from place to place k) particular way of behaving or speaking which has become a habit I) match suit (phrasal verb) m) hat which is hard, rounded and usually black n) having feet which are not curved underneath o) painful 46 ELS 1. Charles Chaplin began to gain in popularity as a comedian A) as soon as he arrived in America B) only when he created his own individual style, based on many borrowed ideas C) when he copied other comedians already famous at that time D) after he had directed a few silent movies E) only after he began to use a bowler hat and a walking stick 2. It is stated in the passage that A) Chaplin showed great talent as a music-hall artist in his childhood B) Chaplin's parents were both stars on the stage C) Chaplin's parents hoped that their son would also become a star one day D) directing films contributed greatly to Chaplin's becoming famous as a comedian E) Chaplin was a director as well as being a very popular actor 3. We can infer from the passage that the accessories Chaplin used A) originated from the appearance of a taxi driver in London B) had to be stolen from other comedians because of his lack of money C) were each given certain functions in his performances D) were borrowed from several places which helped actors at that time E) made him the king of silent movies of his time 1. A lot of people don't believe that ice-cream 2. Without the chips, but I really enjoy them together. of our Nepalese guide, we would never have succeeded in climbing Mt. Everest. 3. I don't like coffee as much as filtered coffee. 4. I've been looking at the computer screen all day, and now my eyes are really 5. Hurting another human being can never be under any circumstances. ELS 47 It's certain that to repress the aggressiveness of a child will make him later more aggressive and anti-social he will later on revenge himself for his sufferings by criminality or by acts of cruelty. The desire to hurt living things generally appears in the child who has been given a strong hatred of authority. This problem of cruelty is very difficult to handle. It requires the parents to use good temper and good sense, trying to find out where the child's real interests lie and guiding its energy to these channels. Except in the worst cases, sympathetic treatment by parents and teachers will gradually suffice to cure, for it will give back self-confidence, self-love, and a belief in life, and it is the absence of these which is the cause of cruelty. hurt or punish someone when we believe wrong has been done to us (two words) g) things that make someone feel pain or unhappiness h) wish strong feeling of want i) the ability to behave well and make good decisions j) ways directions k) understanding, especially of someone's feelings I) be enough to do something, or to meet a need 48 ELS 1. According to psychologists A) B) C) D) E) the instinct for aggression normally exists only during childhood if the child's aggressive instincts can't be eliminated, he'll revenge himself in his later life aggressiveness is an instinct which exists in all human beings the problem of cruelty is too difficult for parents to deal with on their own combative and aggressive instincts should be repressed in childhood so that the person won't turn out to be a cruel adult 2. Psychologists suggest that to cure cruelty, A) B) C) D) E) first of all, the causes of it should be found out so that the best results can be obtained the child should be directed to spending his energy on what he is really interested in the child should be persuaded to give up his desire to hurt living things parents and teachers should work in cooperation with psychologists the child should be provided with an environment which will keep him in contact with society 3. It's pointed out in the passage that A) B) C) D) E) aggressiveness is the result of parents using authoritative approaches against the child the aggressive instinct of a person can only be cured by psychologists parents are not aware of the dangers of repressing the aggressive instinct in the child if a child has a desire to hurt living things, parents should use more authority on him in serious cases of cruelty, parents' or teachers' understanding approach won't be a sufficient cure 1. I've always had a 2. She was unable to to stop working and travel the world. her anger when she gave the manager her list of complaints. 3. The teacher was very when her student explained how his family problems were affecting his studies. 4. There is no need to take medicine if having a good rest will 5. If you had any , you wouldn't have tried to carry those heavy bags with your bad back. ELS 49 Most headset stereos have one thing in common they can cause hearing loss. Studies have shown that sound levels from the machines can reach 115 decibels or more - roughly equivalent to standing 100 feet from a commercial jet at the moment of take-off. At that level, permanent hearing damage can occur after just 15 minutes. And the earlier a child begins using a headset, the more damage can accumulate. Loud noise causes hearing loss by killing irreplaceable hair cells in the inner ear. Normally, the process occurs slowly as people age, but noise damage can accelerate it. Noise-induced hearing loss is insidious damage may not be apparent until later in life. Since headsets are used privately, parents often don't realize how loud their children's music is. used for business and making money g) increase over a period of time h) cannot be replaced i) make something happen faster or sooner j) caused by sound k) doing harm gradually and without being noticed I) 50 clearly seen or understood ELS 1. The effect of loud noise, as stated in the passage A) is not always noticed before it has already damaged the ear B) is greater as people become older C) caused by commercial jets is irreparable D) is more damaging for the ear than anything else E) can be dangerous if the person is standing 100 feet from the source of sound 2. The normal process of hearing loss A) can start at any age, depending upon the condition of the person's ears B) can be sped up by the harm done by loud noise C) occurs if the person is frequently subjected to loud noise D) is noticed only when irreplaceable hair cells in the inner ear have been killed E) is caused when sound levels from machines reach 115 decibels or more 3. Unable to hear the music their child is listening to through a headset, parents A) are advised not to buy one for their child B) can't easily understand what kind of music he is interested in C) are advised to take the child to the doctor more frequently to have his ears checked D) don't have the opportunity to control the intensity of the sound E) don't know that the intensity of the sound from the music set is almost equal to that from a commercial jet 1. My sister and I don't have much we don't even like the same music, 2. The amount of damage done by the fire was only after it had been extinguished. 3. Petroleum is a/an resource and is being used up very fast. People should invest more in renewable energy before it is too late. 4. There is a bus 5. Carbon monoxide is a/an every ten minutes, so you won't have to wait long. gas, so people do not notice when they are being poisoned by it. So why don't people have fewer children. Statistics from the developed countries suggest that it is only when people's living standards begin to rise that birth rates begin to fall. There are good reasons for this. Poor countries cannot afford social services and old age pensions, and people's incomes are so low they have nothing to spare for savings. Having a large family can be a form of insurance. And even while they are still quite young, children can do a lot of useful jobs on a small farm. So poor people in a developing country will need to see clear signs of much better conditions ahead before they can think of having smaller families. But their conditions cannot be improved unless there is a reduction in the rate at which population is increasing. This will depend on a very much wider acceptance of family planning and this, in turn, will mean basic changes in attitudes. a) money paid periodically by the government to people who have retired (phrase) b) wages salaries money earned, usually, from work c) money kept, often in a bank, for use at a later time d) depend or rely on someone expect or hope someone will help (phrase) e) the act of agreeing to do or use something f) as a result in proper order or sequence g) fundamental h) way of thinking or feeling 52 ELS 1. According to the writer, people in poor countries have a lot of children mainly because A) they rely on them for support during their old age B) they aren't yet prepared for family planning due to their religious beliefs C) they usually become involved with farming, which makes it easier for them to be fed D) methods of family planning are not being satisfactorily practised in those countries E) they receive government support for every child 2. The writer points out that, before deciding upon family planning A) governments of poor countries should increase the amount of old age pensions B) developed countries should help developing ones to improve their standards of living C) governments of developing countries must forbid parents to use child labour on farms D) people in poor countries want to be sure of their future E) people in poor countries must be educated by social services, being clearly shown the advantages of having fewer children 3. We can conclude from the writer's statements that birth rates in developed countries A) should be higher so that the population can meet the demand for manpower B) can't be reduced without strict family planning C) decreased as standards of living increased D) will go on increasing unless people change their attitudes radically E) are now keeping pace with economic growth 1. Many people believe that the British have a kinder to their animals than they do to their children. 2. The elimination of pollution in the seas round Istanbul will , lead to the increase in the number and variety offish to be found. 3. my friends for help. 4. The 5. My monthly ingredients for any cake are flour, butter, eggs and sugar. is barely enough to pay for the essentials. ELS 53 For many people, such as the Balinese, a funeral symbolizes the passage from one life to another, rather than the end of a person's existence. In Bali, a cremation is therefore a time of joy and celebration. On the morning of the cremation, friends and relatives gather to pay their last respects and to eat and drink ยง with the family. There is then a procession to the cremation ground, some men carrying the corpse in a tower built of bamboo and paper, and other men carrying a special container called a sarcophagus, which may be in the shape of a cow or a bull. At the cremation ground the body is transferred to the sarcophagus and when it has been reduced to ashes and the soul released, there is a happy noisy procession to the sea, where the ashes are scattered. This last section of the ceremony represents cleansing and purification. come together in a group when the body dies m) throw things so that they spread over a large area n) freeing from anything unpleasant or evil o) removal of sins in a religious ceremony 1. It's clear from the passage that A) in Bali, the closest relatives carry the corpse to the cremation ground B) Balinese people burn dead bodies and scatter the ashes into the sea C) Balinese people put the ashes of the dead person in a special container called a sarcophagus D) in Bali, the family of the dead person has to sacrifice a cow or a bull before the cremation E) in Bali, dead bodies are burnt in a tower built of bamboo and paper 2. For Balinese people, funerals are not sad occasions because A) for them, death means the end of a sorrowful life on earth B) all the members of a family come together on the morning of the funeral C) they believe that the dead continue to live in another life D) they think funerals enable them to show their respect for the dead E) the existence of a person, according to their beliefs, should be celebrated 3. The writer states that, according to the beliefs of almost all religions A) people continue to exist in some form after death B) cremation is essential for cleansing and purification C) funerals are celebrated with joy and happiness D) relatives gather on the morning of the funeral to pay their last respects to the dead person E) the container in which the corpse is placed is made in the shape of a cow or a bull 1. If you can't find a big enough to hold all of this stuff, we'll have to use 2. The footballer was unhappy at his club, so the manager decided to two smaller ones. him to another club. 3. Everybody around the ambulance to see what was happening. 4. I have an enormous family, but I don't know most of my relatives as they are all over the world. 5. The carnival was a noisy, colourful of adults and children, all wearing costumes and dancing and singing. ELS 55 The festival celebrates the traditions of the British black community, who emigrated to Great Britain from the West Indies in the 1950s. They brought with them the Caribbean idea of the carnival, with processions, colourful costumes, steel bands and street dancing. Preparations for the carnival begin many months beforehand. Costumes have to be made, and floats built, ready for the street procession. Steel bands practise traditional Caribbean music on instruments made from old oil drums. Shortly before the festival, the streets are decorated with red, green and yellow streamers, and amplifiers are set in place, to carry the rhythmic sounds over the roar of the London traffic. The carnival lasts for three days, and is full of music and colour. Processions of floats, steel and brass bands, and dancers in exotic costumes make their way through the narrow London streets, watched by thousands of people. The streets are lined with stalls selling tropical fruits, such as fresh pineapple, watermelons and mangoes. Everybody dances - black and white, young and old - and even the policemen on duty take part in the fun. For these three days in August, a little Caribbean magic touches the streets of London. 56 ELS 1. Although Notting Hill Carnival is a celebration of the traditions of black people in Britain A) people from all over the world come to watch it B) everybody seems to participate in it C) Caribbean people also take part in it D) it touches on native British traditions as well E) it is gaining in popularity among the white in recent years 2. During the Carnival, A) the police find it difficult to keep the participants under control B) preparations begin early in the morning C) the participants in the carnival decorate the streets with colourful streamers D) traffic is banned from certain streets E) music and colour fill the streets of London 3. The writer states that A) thousands of people take part in the preparations for the carnival B) this carnival has been held since the 1950s C) dancers in the carnival wear special clothes D) usually there are many injuries during the carnival because of the great crush of people E) the dancers in the carnival are from the black community 1. They are planning to to Australia because they think there will be more opportunities there. 2. When we went to the concert, we immediately to the front of the crowd so that we could see better. 3. We bought the tickets so as not to be disappointed on the day. 4. When I have saved enough money, I intend to go on a long holiday to all the places I have always dreamt about. 5. I hate market days because it is so difficult to walk round all the in the street. ELS 57 He was the son of a bankrupt, but became a millionaire a scientist with a love of literature an industrialist who managed to remain an idealist. He made a fortune but lived a simple life, and although cheerful in company he was often sad in private. A lover of mankind, he never had a wife or family to love him a patriotic son of his native land, he died alone on foreign soil. He invented a new explosive, dynamite, to improve the peacetime industries of mining and road building, but saw it used as a weapon of war to kill and injure his fellow men. During his useful life he often felt he was useless Alfred Nobel, he once wrote of himself, ought to have been put to death by a kind doctor as soon as, with a cry, he entered life. Worldfamous for his work, he was never personally well-known, for throughout his life he avoided publicity. I do not see, he once said, that I have deserved any fame and I have no taste for it. Since his death, however, his name has brought fame and glory to others. His famous will, in which he left money to provide prizes for outstanding work in Physics Chemistry, Physiology, Medicine, Literature and Peace, is a memorial to his interests and ideals. And so, the man who felt he should have died at birth is remembered and respected long after his death. a) noticeable differences when compared b) enormous amount of money c) with other people present d) without anybody present e) loving and being faithful to one's own country f) a bomb, to blow up g) digging deep underground to get minerals such as coal and diamonds h) attention from the public i) condition of being well-known j) have a liking or preference for (phrase) k) admiration and honour for an achievement I) document written before death which says what should happen to one's possessions after death m) impressive remarkable n) something by which it becomes possible to remember a past event or person 58 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. From the descriptions in the passage, we can conclude that Alfred Nobel A) led a steady and luxurious life B) never felt happy in his life C) believed that life wasn't worth living D) lived in affluence throughout his life E) had a life full of contradictions 2. Since Alfred Nobel's death A) there have been many outstanding people in the fields which he had supported during his life B) work towards world peace has been sped up C) his inventions in different fields have been awarded with several prizes D) the people who do the best work in certain fields have been honoured through his will E) the contrasts in his life haven't been explained satisfactorily 3. Alfred Nobel considered himself useless A) because of the use of his invention, dynamite, in wars B) because he couldn't help his father to overcome bankruptcy C) although he did many good things throughout his life D) as he had strong patriotic feelings yet still never succeeded in doing anything worthwhile for his country E) as he had never become outstanding in the fields in which he was interested 1. The author's new book has received a lot of favourable 2. His work this year has been It was much better than anyone had expected. 3. The between the two sisters are quite incredible. You wouldn't believe that they were related. 4. She always says that she doesn't approve of smoking, but I think she smokes because she often smells of cigarettes 5. I spent an absolute at the shops yesterday, far more than I'd intended. ELS 59 Misers seem almost obsessed with the idea of saving, so they accumulate money in banks if their income is large, or in the house - stuffed in mattresses or under the living room rug - if they are lowincome people. They deprive themselves of many things and spend money just on the most essential things. Spenders are people who have a tendency to spend too much on too many unnecessary things. They are often too generous, making elaborate gifts to friends and family. Credit cards in some spenders' hands are often dangerous weapons. They become addicted to using them, only to regret it later when the bills come in and they are unable to pay. Economizers are practical people who spend wisely, usually making use of a budget. They can enjoy more and various material things and activities due to their careful utilization of funds. They spend in moderation and save in moderation for their future retirement or the education of their children. Of these three types of people, economizers are what most of us are having to be in our age. The acute problems of inflation, shortages, and low salaries are forcing us to become economizers. It is the only way to be if we are to survive in the future. Hopefully, the misers and big spenders will modify their extreme attitudes towards money in these circumstances and convert into economizers. use (phrase) g) use in a practical way [noun] h) sharp severe i) change slightly 60 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the writer, some spenders use their credit cards A) to buy elaborate gifts for their friends B) mostly for their essentials C) for bills which they are unable to pay in cash D) so that they can be generous E) with results for which they are eventually sorry 2. The writer implies that the economizers A) spend more on the necessary things and less on entertainment B) have the best attitude to money C) give their children a better education D) are only interested in material things E) are much better than other people 3. The writer states that A) we are being forced to become economizers because of the economic situation B) misers and spenders cause inflation problems C) we won't be able to survive the shortages in the future D) at a certain point in life it is necessary to economize E) in other circumstances it would be acceptable to be a miser or a spender 1. I can't sleep at night because my is so uncomfortable. I'll have to get a new one. 2. She absolutely with that pop-group. She has all their records and buys every magazine or newspaper that even mentions them. 3. The shortage has been more in rural areas due to transportation problems. 4. This computer program will have to be 5. Have you been able to a little to suit our requirements. that book I lent you. I've always found it very handy. ELS 61 In any ordinary field, two million spiders may be hard at work.They thrive in the hottest jungles and the coldest polar regions. They have been found even at the height of 22,000 feet (6,700 meters), on Mount Everest. The spider's incredible silk-spinning organs are on its abdomen. The silk thread begins as a liquid that hardens on contact with the air. A spider can make many different kinds of silk thread. Each kind has its own special purpose. By using certain tubes, or by combining the threads in different ways, a spider can make a very delicate thread or a thick, broad band of silk. Some sizes are used to line their nests or retreats. Others are used for egg cocoons, or for tying up victims, or for weaving webs. Spider silk is stronger than silkworm silk. If twisted into a rope.it can lift more weight than a rope of the same size made of iron wire. Wilson quotes an old Ethiopian proverb, When spider webs unite, they can halt a lion. Although lions have never been seen in spider webs, there does seem to be some truth in this. Scientists believe that cooperative prey-capturing in spiders has probably evolved because it improves efficiency. It also allows the spiders to go after larger prey. Cooperation and sharing improve the use of their webs and the food available to them. net made by spiders from their silk in order to catch food g) to wind together h) thin metal thread i) say or write someone else's words J) stop k) catching animals forfood I) change over the years due to environmental conditions 62 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. We understand from the passage that spiders A) can live in virtually any climate B) are increasing in number every year C) prefer hot jungles to cold places D) have more different species than any other animal E) are the hardest-working of all animals 2. The silk that spiders produce A) is stronger than iron B) has to be twisted before use C) can measure 6,700 metres in length D) has a variety of specific functions E) can be used in the same way as silkworm silk 3. It is stated that when spiders work together A) they are stronger than the strongest animals B) they can capture more and bigger prey C) any food they catch is then shared equally D) the webs they weave become much more complex E) they are less vulnerable to attack by lions 1. Since we moved to the country, the children have on the clean air and fresh food. 2. The traffic was 3. The bandits were in their mountain to allow the President's car to pass. and so the police were unable to find them. 4. After repairing the broken vase, you'll need to wait for 24 hours before using it again so that the glue can 5. I believe that we're going to get a pay-rise, but don't me on that-it's just a rumour. ELS 63 The former method simply consists of setting an elephant to work and beating him until he does what is expected of him. Apart from any moral considerations, this is a stupid method of training, for it produces a resentful animal who at a later stage may well turn into a man-killer. The gentle method requires more patience in the early stages, but produces a cheerful, goodtempered elephant who will give many years of loyal service. The first essential in elephant training is to assign to the animal a single trainer who will be entirely responsible for the job. Elephants like to have one master just as dogs do, and are capable of a considerable degree of personal affection. There are even stories of half-trained elephant calves who have refused to feed and pined to death when, by some unavoidable circumstance, they have been deprived of their own trainer. Such extreme cases must probably be taken with a grain of salt, but they do underline the general principle that the relationship between elephant and trainer is the key to successful training. don't take too seriously don't believe something is completely true (phrase) 64 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. When comparing the tough and gentle elephant-training techniques, the writer considers the latter to be A) stupid and largely immoral B) the method which is more successful C) very time-consuming and lacking in rewards D) the one more likely to harm the elephant E) the more enjoyable 2. The most important point when training an elephant is A) not to change the trainer B) to give it a dog for company C) to show it lots of affection D) not to try to train calves E) to choose a good-tempered elephant 3. According to the writer, the tough training technique A) is much faster than the gentle B) requires a trainer of great physical strength C) creates cheerful, loyal elephants D) is not only foolish but also immoral E) is only effective for a short period 1. I have a great for the elderly couple next-door, who are always so kind and friendly. 2. The only way I'm going to manage to lose weight is by myself all the food I like most. 3. The top two most popular overseas holiday destinations for British tourists are Spain and 4. She felt so Greece about the way she'd been treated at work that she refused to speak to even her closest friends. 5. If we buy the flight tickets today, we can book the hotel ELS 65 Some are content with modest revenues, others are primarily after big money - but most are driven simply by the desire to shape their own destinies. Certainly, all possess qualities such as ingenuity, a good intellect, a healthy sense of self, inner drive, and a clear-cut purpose. It's not luck it's hard work, says one of them. If you work hard, you'll be successful - that's what I always say. You can't rely on anybody but yourself. Perhaps the most engaging quality of the teenage entrepreneurs is their effervescent optimism. Reared in an era of unprecedented exposure to news of disaster, terrorism, famine, and the threat of nuclear mayhem, they nevertheless developed into positive-thinking achievers. Aware of the obstacles, they are far more interested in the opportunities. holding your attention seeming attractive k) lively enthusiastic I) (of children) bring up raise m) never done or known before n) chaos state of no control 66 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, teenage entrepreneurs were able to succeed A) despite growing up in a troubled age B) because they had emigrated to the United States C) because they work much harder than anyone else D) as they were the first children born into their families E) due to their desire to become very rich 2. The motivation most commonly found in teenage entrepreneurs is A) that, as immigrants, they are eager to succeed in the States B) the need to support their younger brothers and sisters C) that they want to determine their own futures D) the opportunity to become extremely wealthy E) the wish to be successful despite unfavourable conditions 3. While a moderate income can be pleasing for some entrepreneurs A) more of them are concerned with helping their families B) many are only interested in what they can achieve C) most get their satisfaction from the hard work D) others want to make a fortune E) very few are prepared to settle for little 1. The plan seemed very to begin with, but on further investigation it was found to be quite complicated. 2. The action the manager took was quite 3. I would be 4. He doesn't believe in 5. She has a lot of and took everyone by surprise. with a small, pretty flat I don't want anything too grand. He thinks you have to live according to a plan. and has managed to succeed despite many difficulties. ELS 67 Since it is based on the lunar calendar, it comes about a month later than the Western New Year. The Chinese New Year season traditionally lasts about a month however, so that working life will not be interrupted for too long, the period has now been reduced to a week or less. There are some parallels with the Western New Year houses are cleaned thoroughly, for instance, and families all get together for the festivities. All debts must be paid off so that the new year can start with a fresh beginning. Feasts are enjoyed with family and friends, and there are lively dragon and lion dances in the streets. Everywhere there is the sound of firecracker explosions. Children receive gifts of little red envelopes with money inside them. Many superstitions are related to the celebration of the Chinese New Year. No sweeping should be done in case the family's good fortune is swept out of the door with the trash. One should be especially careful not to break any dishes, for such an accident is believed to bring about serious problems between members of the family throughout the coming year. a) concerning the moon b) system of dividing time into years, months, and days c) large, special meal d) large imaginary animal in legends (usually a winged reptile) e) small explosive device which makes a noise and is used for entertainment purposes f) belief in cause and effects with no scientific links g) cleaning the floor with a brush or broom h) rubbish 68 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The aim in shortening the Chinese New Year season was A) to bring it closer to the Western New Year traditions B) to lower the cost of celebration C) to reduce the number of feasts held D) to prevent the streets from becoming too congested with dragon and lion dances E) to minimize disruption of work 2. The Chinese and Western New Years A) share certain similarities B) are both celebrated in January C) have absolutely nothing in common D) both last for about a month E) are both based on the lunar calendar 3. At Chinese New Year A) children are the most important people B) debts are traditionally cancelled C) the Chinese observe a lot of superstitions D) nobody eats from dishes E) disagreements in the family are settled 1. If you do the 2. According to English I'll clean the windows. if a black cat crosses your path, you'll have good luck, while in the United States, the same event signals bad luck. 3. It takes the moon twenty-nine-and-a-half days to go round the earth, so this is known as a month. 4. There is so much 5. Although different religions and peoples around the world have their own methods for counting years, the on the beach that it is too dirty to sit on. used internationally is the one introduced by Pope ELS 69 He had with him a special cloth called Serge de Nimes, which would later be called denim in America. Levi Strauss hoped to sell the denim as material to make tents and covers for wagons, to the men who were going to the goldfields to look for gold. You should have brought pants to sell. In the goldfields we need strong pants that don't wear out, one young miner advised Strauss. So Levi Strauss took some of his denim to the nearest tailor and had him make the miner a pair of pants. The miner was so pleased with his pants that he told other miners about the wonderful new Levi's pants or Levis, and soon Levi Strauss had to open a shop to manufacture enough trousers for the miners. The miners wanted trousers that were comfortable to ride in, that were low-cut so they could bend over easily to pick up the gold from under their feet, and which had big useful pockets. One miner complained that the gold in his pockets kept tearing them. So Levi put metal corners in the pockets to make them stronger. Very soon, miners and cowboys from all over came to get fitted up with Levi's pants. Today, more than a hundred years later, Levi's pants walk the world as Levi's blue jeans. a plane, etc. (phrasal verb) c) become useless exhausted (phrasal verb) d) person who digs out metals or minerals from underground e) make or process (a raw material) into a finished product (especially using a large-scale industrial operation) f) (of trousers) made to fit around the hips rather than the waist g) incline the body lean over h) be equipped or supplied with (phrase) 70 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. It's clear that Levi Strauss's original purpose for taking denim to America was A) to provide jeans for the miners B) forgotten when he got off the boat C) to make himself equipment for going to the goldfields D) to sell to the tailors E) not for making trousers 2. The first pair of Levi Strauss jeans A) were admired by many other people B) didn't fit the needs of the miners C) were made as a response to a request D) were no different from today's models E) were made in Bavaria 3. Levi Strauss's trousers first became popular A) because they were so fashionable B) due to the customers talking about them C) as a result of their being affordable D) after they had been sold for a century E) when they had gold put into the corners 1. The was trapped underground for several hours after the explosion. 2. That man is too fat to be wearing trousers. They really don't suit him all. 3. There is a lot of bureaucracy involved in trying to get a job if you are a/an 4. The new soldiers are going to the stores to 5. I've only had these shoes for a month and they've already their uniforms and guns. ELS 71 If someone is killed in a car crash, for example, many people say it was caused by fate, rather than by poor driving or bad road conditions. In many countries, a profitable business has developed around the subject of astrology. Astrologers want us to believe that our characters are formed as soon as we are born, according to the particular zodiac sign we are born under. Many people prefer to believe this than to read the scientific explanations of the development of human character and personality put forward by psychologists and doctors. Hence, in many popular magazines and women's journals, we find a column such as You and Your Stars . And in some countries, you can even ask an astrology expert questions about your future. propose for consideration state (phrasal verb) g) for this reason h) a feature article that appears regularly in a publication, such as a newspaper 72 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, people worldwide A) have to drive on poor road conditions B) tend to be more receptive to mysterious explanations C) consult astrologers before making any plans D) have similar characteristics according to their sign of the zodiac E) cannot control their lives because they are already set by outside influences 2. The subject of astrology A) can only be understood by experts B) holds explanations we cannot find in our normal lives C) is based on the work of scientists and psychologists D) is used by many doctors when looking for diagnoses E) brings in a lot of money for people in several countries 3. According to astrologers A) psychologists have no validity when explaining the development of personality B) it doesn't matter whether you are a good or bad driver because you can't control fate C) women are more likely to follow their horoscopes than men D) the zodiac sign under which a person is born determines his or her character from birth E) a business can be extremely profitable if it is set up with their advice 1. The company, with an annual turnover of several million dollars, is one of the most in the country. 2. Police are still trying to explain the disappearance of the paintings. 3. She says she can guess anybody's just by talking to them for five minutes, and she was right about mine. 4. The company's business has expanded greatly , they are going to be hiring several new staff members. 5. He believes it was that we met again in such an unlikely place, but I think it was just coincidence. ELS 73 In 1960, an American psychiatrist named William Dement published experiments dealing with the recording of eye-movements during sleep. He showed that the average individual's sleep cycle is punctuated with peculiar bursts of eyemovement, some drifting and slow, others jerky and rapid. People woken during these periods of eye-movement generally reported that they had been dreaming. When woken at other times they reported no dreams. If one group of people were disturbed from their eye-movement sleep for several nights on end, and another group were disturbed for an equal period of time but when they were not exhibiting eye-movements, the first group began to show some personality disorders, while the others seemed more or less unaffected. The implications of all this were that it was not the disturbance of sleep that mattered but the disturbance of dreaming. a) interrupt at intervals b) strange unusual c) short and sudden period d) moving slowly with no purpose or direction e) moving abruptly and unevenly f) show display g) something that is suggested or hinted at by something else 74 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. During the research, those woken while dreaming A) were hardly affected at all B) were the ones who had had personality disorders C) reported that their dreams affected their personalities D) were not showing any eye-movement E) displayed signs of disturbance in their personalities 2. We can infer from the passage that during sleep, A) people dream all the time B) the type of eye-movement indicates the type of dream C) there is no eye-movement when the person isn't dreaming D) drifting and slow eye-movement coincides with a dream that can't later be reported E) one's eyes are constantly moving 3. The research implied that A) people with personality disorders dreamt more than others B) interrupting dreams was more significant than interrupting sleep C) dreamless sleep led to fewer personality disorders D) dreams lasted for equal periods of time in different people E) if sleep was disturbed, then dreams later became disturbed as well 1. It wasn't until the ship nearly grounded itself that the onlookers realized that the crew was in trouble. 2. She has some very ideas which both confuse and amuse me. 3. He has been