It is argued in the passage that A) man must be punished if he rebels B) you cannot be an individual with imagination and creativity C) man only needs the basics in today's society D) the demands of society prevent man's individuality E) people are very pedestrian these days 3. An individual A) with distortions of personality cannot fit into the group culture B) is constantly competing for his own development C) who doesn't comply with the rules of society may be punished D) develops emotional instability if he is not part of a society E) strives to be a contributing member of society 1. I rarely eat sweet things, but very occasionally I get the to go out and buy an enormous bar of chocolate. 2. The image of an English person is of someone who is very cold, reserved, and unemotional, but this is not at all true. 3. What he said to the manager was such a of the facts that I'm surprised he was believed. 4. Because of a in the ignition the car wouldn't start. 5. The country's economy will never recover while there is so much in the government. ELS 193 Yet still, some people regularly complain about everything, griping at the taxes and the political opposition and lambasting everyone around them. Frequently the gripers wind up in the doctor's office. But I know many executives who carry on under tremendous pressure as affably and kindly as a girl skipping down the street. They are the people who get along and stay out of the hospitals. It is particularly important in family life to develop the habit of pleasant conversation. Do not - for either your own, your children's, or your digestion's sake - make the family meal a recitation of troubles, anxieties, fears, warnings, and accusations. And what is more important, don't let the feeling pervade your family that everyone is so taken for granted that a pleasantry or kind word is unnecessary. The crabbed note that clangs daily in so many families is a good foundation for many of the neurotic characteristics of later life. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 194 ELS ] ' i- - Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The writer states by giving an example that, even under great pressure, A) many executives show no more sense than a young girl B) a lot of people refuse to be admitted to hospital C) the government will not do anything to change taxes D) there are people who manage to remain pleasant E) some people are not even interested in the activities of their own families 2. We can infer from the writer's statement that A) he himself is very cheerful and has an excellent sense of humour B) families with an unpleasant atmosphere are not uncommon C) to avoid indigestion it is best to eat one's meals in silence D) neurotic characteristics are never apparent in the young E) in a close family relationship, kind words are not necessary 3. The writer states that many people who habitually complain too much A) pay more taxes than everyone else B) are taken for granted by their families C) eventually make themselves ill D) are rarely under any pressure E) are members of opposition parties 1. The opening of the new gallery attracted interest from both the art world and the general public. 2. A marriage cannot survive without a 3. The discontent among a small group of workers of mutual trust and respect. the entire company and left an atmosphere of insecurity. 4. Perhaps if you were to send her some flowers occasionally, instead of just her , she wouldn't be so irritable. 5. I thought the play was quite , but no one else in the theatre appeared to be laughing. ELS 195 The pasta is so plentiful that it's falling off the plate. Yes, your meal is appetizing. But isn't it more than you bargained for. In an era when consumers look for great deals, it often seems as though the bigger things are, the better value for your money. Supersize it, the slogan from a fast-food restaurant chain, seems to sum it up. But more isn't always better particularly when it comes to weight loss. Sometimes leaving a little food on your plate is worth much more than the dollar it might cost. Watching your total food intake, not just limiting unhealthy foods, is the key to good health and permanent weight loss. Healthy foods are not without any restrictions. Excess calories from any food, not just fatty or fried ones, can cause weight gain. In today's the-more-you-get-the-better society, package sizes keep growing. Giant bottles of soda, extra large bags of chips, and king-size candy bars are all the rage. But as these foods get larger, so do our waistlines. Bigger packages and food items W apparently distort portion control. In fact, research from the University of Illinois shows that some people tend to eat more from larger food containers. When movie-goers were given popcorn containers of two different sizes, the people given the larger ones ate 44 percent more. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, it is the trend today A) not to worry about one's weight B) to eat healthy foods only C) for customers not to be very knowledgeable about prices D) to regard leaving food on your plate as a waste of money E) to sell food and drink in large packages 2. From the details in the passage, it is clear that currently A) average body size is expanding at the same time as package sizes are getting bigger B) we are eating healthier food, although we are eating more C) portions at fast-food restaurants are getting smaller D) Supersize it is a marketing slogan that doesn't actually mean an increase in portion size E) people eat the same amount regardless of package size 3. We can infer from the passage that overly large portions of healthy food A) can nevertheless make us gain weight B) are just as bad to our health as junk food C) are essential for our long-term health D) may put us off our food completely E) are no longer trendy As we need to leave soon for the theatre, I have made a quick meal of with meat sauce. 2. My uncle eats all of the time, as a result he has a very large 3. When the big bully decided to pick a fight with little Randy, who looked so small and weak, he quickly found that he'd got more than he had because Randy was a black belt in judo. 4. Doctors recommend that women should not consume more than the equivalent of fourteen glasses of wine a week and that men's should not exceed twenty-one glasses. 5. There have been ideal growing conditions for strawberries this year, and so they are quite now. ELS 197 He believed, moreover, that children are innately good, but that all social institutions, including schools, are evil and distort children into their own image. He doubted, therefore, that there should be formal schools at all. Whether there were or not, however, he believed that the aim of education should be the natural development of the learner. Between the ages of two and twelve, Rousseau envisioned the cultivation of the body and the senses, not the intellect. When the youngster's intellect begins to develop, between the ages of twelve and fifteen, he can begin the study of such things as science and geography. This study, however, should begin not with an organized body of abstract knowledge, but with the things that interest the child. He must learn not by memorizing, but by firsthand experience. Only when he is fifteen years of age should book learning begin. Since Rousseau believed that the child is innately good and that the aim of education should be his natural development, there would be little for the teacher to do except stand aside and watch. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as have an image of something sight and hearing (plural) i) the power of thinking j) learning and remembering something exactly k) learnt directly from personal participation and not from other people (phrase) I) be uninvolved keep out of the way (phrase) 198 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Following Rousseau's opinion, we can say that A) children should only be allowed to develop the abilities they are born with B) evildoers are not born with their bad qualities but learn them through social institutions C) schools and other educational facilities are the worst social institutions D) there should definitely be no formal education or schools for children E) children are born fully developed intellectually, physically, and emotionally 2. Rousseau believed that, once a child reaches the age of about 12, he A) may start studying the natural world, which offers him firsthand experience B) should start reading books, but alone, not with a teacher C) should be ready to start using his powers of reason for more abstract things D) is old enough to be sent to a formal school and be taught abstract knowledge E) will naturally know almost everything he needs to know 3. We can conclude that, according to Rousseau's ideology, a child should be taught by A) teachers who have little interest in children's development B) teachers who have a lot of personal experience and knowledge C) teachers who will allow him to discover things for himself D) other children in the same situation, and not by adults at all E) teachers who specialize in physical education and nothing else The only way to learn how to ski is through You can read about it in a book, but until you actually try it, you won't understand the technique. 2. Since they can't see, blind people have to rely on their other , especially hearing. 3. I that Mert wrote this by himself - his English is generally quite weak, but this is rather well-written. 4. History is a boring subject if it's just a case of dates and names, but 5. Ruth Lawrence-the little girl who went to Oxford University at the age of 12-obviously had a it's absolutely fascinating when you start to examine the causes and effects of events. powerful , but it's unlikely that she was emotionally prepared for living in such an adult environment. ELS 199 Romanticism had a dynamic impact on art, literature, science, religion, economics, politics, and the individual's understanding of self. There is no single commonly accepted definition of Romanticism, but it has some features upon which there is general agreement. First of all, it was a rejection of the Enlightenment and its emphasis upon human reason. The Enlightenment thinkers asserted that the world of nature is rationally ordered and that human reason, therefore, can analyze, understand, and use it. On the basis of this understanding, a rational society can be constructed. These were ideas that were almost totally opposed by Romantics. Romanticism did not appear suddenly. It was the year of the publication of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe's Sorrows of Werther, a novel about a young man who is so disappointed in love that he kills himself. This fictional suicide brought on many real ones as the novel's vogue swept across Europe. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a) someone or something that has a strong influence b) make something into a particular form c) a strong effect that one thing or person has on another d) a person or thing referred to in terms of its complete individuality e) generally f) a statement which explains the exact meaning of something g) a refusal to accept something h) special importance given to something i) the ability to think and form opinions based on facts j) state an opinion forcefully k) (be) arranged I) (be) made (be) created m) unhappiness n) happening in a story, not in real life o) the act of killing oneself p) fashionable popularity q) spread quickly 200 ELS , Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Concerning a definition of Romanticism, it is made clear in the passage that A) nobody agrees on anything about this movement B) Romanticism developed in parallel to the Enlightenment C) nobody has ever attempted to define exactly what it was D) it's difficult to define the term and there's much disagreement E) it had many ideas in common with the Enlightenment 2. It may be inferred from the passage that Romantics believed that A) human beings were not capable of understanding and controlling nature B) the Enlightenment produced many important and useful ideas C) an ordered society was more important than any individual person D) the human mind could understand and analyze the natural world E) it was possible for humans to construct an ordered and rational society 3. The Sorrows of Werther A) was written in 1774 as a textbook on Romanticism B) apparently caused many people to kill themselves C) was little-known when written, but is quite famous today D) is acknowledged as the book which created Romanticism overnight E) was the true story of a man who killed himself for love One of the major problems with organ transplants is not the transplant itself, but the body's of the new organ - the body has a tendency to rid itself of all foreign matter. 2. My first visit to a slaughterhouse had such an enormous on me that I immediately quit eating all meat and all animal products, and I am still a vegan to this day. 3. Canis lupus known as the wolf, is being found increasingly in 4. People who look after young children have a great responsibility, as they help to Switzerland, according to recent reports. the child's personality and to create the person that the child will become in later life. 5. The company does most of its business abroad, and therefore, places a great deal of on its employees being able to speak at least one foreign language. ELS 201 I The Roman writer Seneca once commented All things are cause either for laughter or weeping. The 18th-century French dramatist Pierre-Augustin Beaumarchais echoed Seneca's words by stating I hasten to laugh at everything, for fear of being obliged to weep. Both Seneca and Beaumarchais understood that laughing and crying are closely related emotional responses to some kind of outside stimulus. They knew that in life, as in drama, comedy and tragedy are never far apart. Both laughing and crying serve to release tension. Laughter, like weeping, is a reflex action rooted in the central nervous system and its related hormones. It is expressed in the contraction of certain facial muscles and in altered breathing patterns. The stimulus that brings forth laughter is called humour. To define laughter and humour in this way, however, is to leave unanswered two questions firstly, why do people laugh and secondly, just what is funny, or humorous. The questions are difficult to answer because emotions and the reasons for them are not easily analyzed. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as of a person c) act quickly d) (be) made to feel it is necessary to do something e) relating to feelings f) reaction to something g) something which causes someone or something to react in a certain way h) perform a function i) (be) caused by originate from {phrase) j) the act of becoming smaller or shorter k) relating to the face I) changed m) produce cause to happen (phrase) n) examine closely and in detail in order to understand 202 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Seneca and Beaumarchais would have agreed that A) there is nothing in life that cannot be seen as funny in some way B) it is necessary to cry if something isn't at all humorous C) the best way to deal with unpleasant events is to laugh at them D) everything in life could be seen as either humorous or tragic E) you should be careful about whether a particular situation requires you to laugh or to cry 2. Laughing and crying are similar in that A) each action provides the body with stimulation B) they both leave people somewhat relaxed C) they are both the result of excessive hormones D) many people cannot distinguish the difference between them E) they are produced by the same stimuli 3. It is difficult to define humour and identify the causes of laughter because A) people find it difficult to look at comedy seriously B) most people are much more concerned with tragedy C) people get nervous when being studied and so cannot laugh D) the physical responses to humour are already known E) there is no easy way to study emotions scientifically 1. Most things get smaller in cold weather, so engineers must consider the effects of this when designing buildings and bridges. 2. I don't actually enjoy buying Christmas presents for my family, but as it is a longstanding tradition, I'm 3. to do it if I don't want to hurt their feelings. Isaac has few ideas of his own and simply tends to whatever his older brother says. 4. If you're planning to go anywhere during the upcoming holiday, I recommend that you to book your tickets now. If you wait, all the planes may be full up. 5. Delia went to Budapest on holiday and when she returned, her appearance was so that I hardly recognized her. It seems that she went there for cosmetic surgery. ELS rj 203 It was made of a material he had not seen before. Priestley noticed that it could rub away pencil marks, and so he named the material rubber. Not only has the name stuck, but since then rubber has become so important to modern society that it is hard to imagine life without it. The flexibility, elasticity, and durability of natural and synthetic rubbers have made them the choice materials for products that cushion shocks, soften blows, dampen vibrations, transmit power, and perform in many other ways. Tires, automotive components, electrical insulation, conveyor belts, theatre seats, building materials, footwear, elastic bands, tennis balls, surgical gloves, artificial hearts, and refrigerator linings these are only a sampling of the huge and growing list of products that are completely or partly made of rubber. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a) causing great interest b) able to spring back after striking a surface c) erase remove (phrase) d) become or remain fixed e) the quality of being able to be bent f) the quality of being able to be stretched g) the quality of being able to last a long time h) absorb and lessen the impact i) a hard hit, given using the fist or a weapon j) make something feel less strong k) one of the parts which make up something I) any material that covers or fills something in order to prevent energy from escaping m) a device which uses a continuous band of moving rubber to transport items (phrase) n) relating to medical purposes o) the inside covering of something 204 ELS -. Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Priestly called the new material rubber, A) as was instructed by his American friend B) because it was soft and could easily be rubbed C) since he had shaped the ball by rubbing it on a hard surface D) having been inspired by one of its functions E) as it could rub surfaces without wearing them out 2. If rubber had not been discovered A) people would have to use synthetic substitutes instead B) there would not be any shoes, chairs, or gloves C) people would be even less imaginative than they are now D) life today would be considerably different from what it is E) there's a good chance that human life would have ended 3. The passage makes it clear that, at present, there are many types of products made from rubber, A) though it seems that many are being replaced by plastics B) and it seems quite likely that there will be more in the future C) despite the fact that the material tends to wear out quickly D) but people tend to stay away from the material and use natural substitutes instead E) yet they are only available in technologically advanced countries 1. Bungee jumpers trust their lives to the of a product known as a bungee - they know it will be able to stretch enough to absorb the shock of their fall, but at the same time, will not break from the strain. 2. Levi jeans are known for their as well as their comfort, so people are willing to pay more for them because they know the jeans will last a long time. 3. In cold climates, most people put a layer of inside their walls - this not only keeps the house warmer by preventing the heat from escaping, but it also reduces heating bills. 4. The more she read about the way that Anne Frank's family managed to live hidden from the Nazis for so long, the more 5. I bought a special pot with a Teflon their story seemed. - the inside is coated with the material, which allows me to cook without worrying about food sticking to the pot. ELS 205 Other American industrialists and factory managers were stunned when automobile manufacturer Henry Ford announced in 1914 that he would pay his assembly line workers $5.00 a day and reduce the working day from nine to eight hours. The average daily wage in American industry at the time was $2.34. He became world famous almost overnight. Opponents derided Ford as a socialist, while supporters called him a great humanitarian. Actually, Ford had simply come to understand that mass production required a society composed of many consumers, not just a few wealthy people amid a multitude of poor. He was making cars for the middle class and knew that sales depended on the existence of a middle class able to afford them, preferably including his own workers. This notion went against the grain of most American businessmen, who believed that low wages, coupled with the highest possible prices, were necessary to make a profit. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as among j) a very large number k) idea I) be in conflict with normal behaviour (phrase) m) together with (phrase) Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. We can infer from the passage that Henry Ford revolutionized American industry by A) producing automobiles everyone could afford B) preaching socialist values to his own employees C) setting new standards in wages and working hours D) making people work in factories from 8 to 9 hours each day E) supporting consumers although he himself was a manufacturer 2. The principal motivation behind Ford's pay scheme was A) to attract skillful workers from other companies B) to make other wealthy business owners help the poor C) to redistribute wealth by giving more money to the poor D) to eliminate the need for charitable organizations E) to create a larger market for mass-produced goods 3. The passage informs us that, before Henry Ford's innovations, American businessmen A) depended heavily on the middle class both as employees and as customers B) refused to pay workers more than $2.34 for each nine-hour shift of work C) were well-known for their generosity and concern for poor people D) believed in making profit margins high by keeping wages low E) didn't devote much effort to the concept of producing high quality goods Jeff is practising his guitar vigorously for hours every day, but he has no intention of becoming a professional musician he 2. When Columbus suggested that it was possible to sail to India by going west, instead of east, many people 3. loves to play it. him for his idea. In the 1960s, many people decided to and live in a manner in conflict with the rest of society - they were known as hippies and were often harrassed by the police. 4. My friend Lucy has the strange that she is the least-liked person in her family. I don't know where she got this idea from, but she's convinced it's true. 5. When her telephone bill arrived, Helen was -she had expected it to be around £25, but it was, in fact, closer to £200. ELS 207 At that time, the nobles of Europe lived in desolate castles. There were few books to read, and travel was difficult. In such a life, visitors were eagerly welcomed, and most welcome of all was the minstrel. The family would gather around the fireplace of the great hall to hear the minstrel chant his thrilling tales. Through the minstrels' songs ran the theme of chivalry. Chivalry taught knights to defend the church, to make war against infidels, to be courteous and to keep their word. Around these ideals, and around the stories of history and legend that exemplified them, the minstrel built his ballads. They were called romances because the minstrels used one of the Romance languages. The theme of all these early romances is a quest or search. The knight in the story may be seeking the Holy Grail, a lost mistress or mother or father, forgiveness for a sin, or simply adventure for its own sake. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as sing or speak rhythmically g) very exciting h) a code of good behaviour in the Middle Ages i) a person with a different religion from the speaker's own or with no religion j) polite and respectful towards others k) do what one has promised to do (phrase) I) be or give a typical example of something m) a simple song or poem which tells a story n) the state of being no longer angry with one for doing something wrong o) an offence against God or against a religious law p) not for any other reason or purpose (phrase) 208 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. One of the reasons why minstrels were popular in the Middle Ages was that A) the majority of the people were very romantic B) very few people had the ability to read C) the minstrels were generally of noble birth D) people had little entertainment in their lives E) people preferred listening to music to reading books 2. We may infer from the passage that in the Middle Ages, knights were supposed to be A) honourable, honest, and well-mannered B) warlike, savage, and barbaric C) fluent in all the Romance languages D) extremely hospitable to strangers E) forgiving towards other people 3. We learn from the passage that the ballads which the minstrels sang A) were usually romantic love songs B) were intended to teach people history C) were about a hero with a mission D) were based on real personalities E) were written long before the Middle Ages 1. that they hardly slept the whole weekend and it took several weeks for the excitement to wear off. 2. Politicians make all sorts of promises before they are elected, but not many of them once they are in office. 3. Nancy often knits in the evenings while she is watching television. It's not that she likes having a lot of jumpers and scarves, but she just enjoys knitting 4. I won't go to that restaurant again because the waiters are so rude. I don't mind when the service is slow, but I do think that the staff should at least be 5. The murderer turned to religion while he was in jail, and spent most of his time asking God for for his crime. ELS 209 The primary concern of creative writing is not with factual information, or with the more routine forms of communication. It does, however, use many of the same skills. A novel, for example, may contain much sociological, political or psychological information. Scholars may study it for such information, just as Sigmund Freud studied literature for accounts of dreams and emotional states. No true novel, however, is written to communicate facts. Like other forms of creative writing, it attempts to produce in its reader the pleasure of an aesthetic experience. It tries to uncover form and meaning in the turmoil of love, hate, violence, tedium, habit, and the brutal facts which people must deal with from day to day. The novelist and shortstory writer John Cheever, when asked why he wrote, said, To try to make sense out of my life. Whether it takes the form of poem, short story, novel, play, personal essay, or even biography or history, creative writing is certain to involve some search for meaning, a measure of wonder and discovery, and a degree of personal involvement in the result. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as related to a sense of beauty g) a state of confusion, excitement, and anxiety h) the use of physical force to hurt or harm someone very great force of feeling or action i) boredom j) rough and cruel k) a feeling of strangeness, surprise, and admiration I) the state of being connected with someone or something 210 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. One can understand from the passage that creative writing A) is the most common form of communication B) contains little factually correct information C) requires less skill than other forms of writing D) may provide information useful in research E) may be found in certain reference books 2. The author tells us that novels A) try to hide the worst aspects of life B) attempt to interpret life through art C) can make people feel very depressed D) are only read by artistically-minded people E) let us experience the extraordinary things in life 3. One point that John Cheever's quote illustrates is that A) creative writing can be very informative B) he is not really a terribly creative writer C) biography is generally better than fiction D) it's difficult to find meaning in creative writing E) creative writing involves the writer personally I didn't enjoy the film because there was too much in it. I don't enjoy watching people getting hurt and killed. 2. Mary didn't have any health problems - she just went to see her doctor for a/an medical checkup, so she was quite alarmed when he said he wanted to run further tests on her. 3. I'm writing a report on the robbery for the local paper. As you were in the shop when the robbers came in, I wonder if you could give me a/an of what happened. 4. The greatest I can think of is lying outside in a hammock on a warm summer's evening, reading a good book. 5. Florence resigned from her job at the accountancy firm the other day. The salary was good and the work wasn't difficult, but she couldn't stand the of it any more - she had to do the same things every day. ELS 211 He was a man of so many accomplishments in so many areas of human endeavour that his like has rarely been seen in human history. Casual patrons of the arts know him as the painter of La Gioconda - more commonly called the Mona Lisa - and of the exquisite Last Supper , which is painted on the wall of the dining hall in a monastery in Milan. These paintings alone would have assured him enduring fame as an artist, but they should not obscure the fact that he was also a sculptor, an architect, and a man of science who did serious investigations into the natural and physical sciences, mathematics, mechanics, and engineering. More than 300 years before flying machines were perfected, Leonardo had devised plans for prototypes of an airplane and a helicopter. His extensive studies of human anatomy were portrayed in anatomical drawings, which were among the most significant achievements of Renaissance science. His remarkable illustrations of the human body elevated drawing into a means of scientific investigation and exposition, and provided the basic principles for modern scientific illustration. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as one who supports artistic activity (phrase) g) extremely beautiful, delicate, or sensitive h) guarantee [verb] i) make unclear hide j) an artist who makes statues k) an early model, usually experimental, of something I) (be) demonstrated (be) depicted m) a drawing or picture for giving an example or explanation of something n) increase someone or something in status or importance o) a detailed explanation of something 212 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Da Vinci's achievements in the arts A) made it unnecessary for him to work in science B) prevented people from taking his medical achievements seriously C) demonstrate only one of his many and varied talents D) helped him finance his revolutionary work in aeronautics E) were of a higher quality than his work in the field of physics 2. In the field of aeronautics, da Vinci A) was the first man to construct a working airplane or helicopter B) built the first working models of machines used for human flight C) developed a couple of flying machines, but they were far from perfect D) designed flying machines centuries before anyone actually built them E) used his artistic talents to make some of the most beautiful planes ever 3. Da Vinci's work on human anatomy A) allowed for great advancement in the field of medicine B) provided illustrations still used by doctors in the 20th century C) were important because they were done during the Renaissance D) came from his desire to paint people with greater accuracy E) increased the importance of drawing in the scientific process Modern developments have many charming views in this once spectacular and picturesque town. 2. It was quite convenient that the instructions for the bookcase contained as well as words - I couldn't read them as I don't know any Japanese, but by using the pictures, I had no problem putting it together. 3. Before 1991, many people had never even heard of Kuwait, but the fact that a large war was fought over it its status among world nations and now everyone knows of its existence. 4. My brother has me a job as a secretary in his accounting firm, but I'm not certain that I want to work in such a tedious job. 5. Hitler was a very charismatic figure who used his ability to control people to cause untold destruction. Hopefully his will never be seen again, as the world can't handle another person like him. ELS 213 Five years after her sinking, a life jacket from the Lusitania was found, for example, floating along a wharf in Philadelphia - thousands of miles from where the ship went down in 1915. But in the case of the British freighter Waratah, and that of the US Navy collier Cyclops, no clues have ever been brought forward. The 16,800-ton Waratah, only a year old, was last sighted off the coast of South Africa in 1909. The ship had been described by some as top-heavy and may have flipped over in heavy seas with her vanished 211 people. Equally mystifying is the disappearance of the Cyclops, a 19,000-ton ship with 309 people aboard, about seven months before the end of World War I. She was last heard from in March 1918 while en route to Baltimore from the West Indies. Since no logical explanation has ever been offered for her disappearance, the US Navy file on the Cyclops has never been closed. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as having too much weight on the top and not enough on the bottom k) turn so that the bottom is on top (phrasal verb) I) disappear m) on the way somewhere (phrase) n) sensible reasonable 214 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. We learn from the passage that when a ship sinks A) it often creates a small-scale environmental disaster B) there are usually no signs of it until several years later C) the passengers are sometimes not rescued for several years D) there is generally some evidence about what happened to it E) most of its contents float on the sea for many years 2. The Waratah and the Cyclops are interesting in that A) despite being from different countries, they caused each other to disappear B) nobody knows anything about what happened to them, though they were big ships C) though the Waratah was a passenger ship, the Cyclops, which wasn't, lost more people D) the people who know what happened to them are unwilling to tell anyone E) they both disappeared at exactly the same place, though on different dates 3. Since what happened to the Cyclops is unknown A) we must assume that it was sunk by an enemy vessel during the war B) it's quite obvious that the crew weren't wearing their life jackets C) the investigation into its disappearance has never been formally ended D) it would be wrong to assume that the 211 men on board are dead E) the best explanation would be that it was a poorly-designed ship After the explosion the of destroyed buildings was found all over the city. 2. The most difficult part of making an omelette is when it's time to it so that the other side can be cooked - doing this without ruining it takes a lot of skill. 3. The legendary baseballer Babe Ruth had a very strange physique - he was quite , as his massive arms were much bigger than his spindly legs. 4. Things such as pens, calculators, and note pads just seem to in this office if you don't keep an eye on them - I don't know if they're being borrowed by other employees, or thrown away by the janitor. 5. Pan American flight 103 was to New York from Germany when the explosion occurred, killing a total of 270 people. ELS 215 Miguel was killed close to where he had recently shot his last pictures, which were images of a massacre of UN troops. The death of Miguel, who was just 32 years old, deprived television news of the cameraman who shot some of the most compelling and powerful images of war. Miguel did not start out as a photographer or journalist, but as a lawyer. After graduating from Barcelona Central University Law School, he practised law at a city firm before studying Human Rights at the Centre for Human Rights in Barcelona. Miguel believed wholeheartedly in the right and obligation to bear witness and to report. He soon gained himself a reputation for unequalled brilliance in photographing human suffering during conflicts. He worked in dangerous places such as Kosovo, the Congo and Sierra Leone. In 1998, he won the Rory Peck Award for his Kosovo coverage. How many people will be brave enough, like him, to go where the perpetrators of war would rather no one went. How many will carry on the work of bringing the ugly and brutal truth into our comfortable lives. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as supporting something enthusiastically and j) one's duty completely k) state facts which establish truth (phrase) I) without comparison m) misery unhappiness great physical, mental, o emotional pain n) struggle fight o) someone who has committed a harmful or immoral act p) savagely cruel 216 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. It's mentioned in the passage that Miguel last photographed A) the ceremony of the Rory Peck Award B) casualties of the Kosovan crisis C) law graduates from Barcelona Central University D) some war-hardened journalists E) a mass killing of United Nations soldiers 2. The passage states that as a result of Miguel's death, television news A) hired bodyguards for all their journalists B) only hired war-hardened journalists C) no longer covered the war in Sierra Leone D) did not send journalists into war zones E) lost one of its brilliant cameramen 3. Before becoming a journalist and cameraman, Miguel A) worked as a lawyer B) C) won the Rory Peck Award D) escaped a massacre of UN troops E) fought in the Kosovan War 1. A/An of the Inca Emperor, Atahualpa, and South American Indians took place when the Emperor refused to accept the Spanish King as ruler of Peru. The Spanish commander, Francisco Pizarro, and his men shot over 2,000 unarmed Indians. 2. Most people believe that, as citizens of a nation, we all have certain , such as to pay our taxes and vote in elections. 3. Indonesia's rule of the Island of East Timor was even more than Portugal's had been. Murder, beatings, and torture were common. 4. Emmeline Pankhurst believed in women's rights, and in 1903 she founded the Women's Social and Political Union . 5. Mr. Campbell died of a heart attack, which had been brought on by the of his wife's sudden death. ELS 217 Her death highlighted the statistics concerning health-related problems during long flights. In fact, more people die from health-related incidents during flights than from air crashes. Studies show that poor air quality, low oxygen levels, and cramped seating are triggering heart attacks and deep vein thrombosis as well as causing contagious diseases among an increasingly large number of passengers. Long periods of sitting in cramped quarters can cause blood clots to form, especially in the legs and lower abdomen, which can cause deep vein thrombosis, from which Emma died. Passengers have also contracted tuberculosis through recycled air. Despite these problems, the airlines are not addressing these issues and continue to reduce the space between seats. The Aviation Health Institute advises that cabins be ventilated every three minutes, but at present, the average is every ten. To minimize the risk to their health, passengers are advised to exercise and drink plenty of water during a flight. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as lacking in some quality g) rank on a scale of values h) confined restricted i) initiate start j) spread by direct or indirect contact k) belly i) get acquire (for illnesses or diseases) m) lessen n) distance o) circulate fresh air in a room p) the arithmetic mean q) lessen to the lowest amount or degree 218 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, air crashes account for A) the greatest number of deaths during flights B) far fewer deaths than are caused by tuberculosis C) fewer fatalities than from those relating to health problems during flights D) as many deaths as from heart attacks and deep vein thrombosis combined E) only a small proportion of all accidental deaths 2. The author states that airlines are currently A) trying to provide more space for passengers B) ignoring the health-related problems during flight C) doing all they can to make their planes as safe as possible D) providing passengers with such facilities as exercise or plenty of water during their flight E) designing the ventilation systems to prevent any further spread of disease 3. The main factors contributing to health-related problems during flight that are mentioned in the passage are A) the confined space in which a passenger has to sit and inadequate ventilation B) poor safety instructions handed to the passengers by the cabin crew of the aircraft C) the absence of any supply of liquid refreshment served while on board an aircraft D) people travelling when they are suffering from health problems and contagious diseases E) passengers not taking enough exercise before boarding a long flight 1. When Maggie learnt of her son's death, she to the floor immediately. 2. According to government 3. I don't enjoy travelling by coach with that company because the seating conditions are so 4. I'm afraid Erin can't come to the party today because the doctor thinks her illness might be , the official rate of inflation is 25%. , and, so if she came, she might pass it on to the other children. 5. A glue factory has to be well in order to keep the air quality for the workers at a reasonable level. ELS 219 A secret order of Muslims was founded in Persia in about 1090 by a man named Hasan-i-Sabbah. After gaining control of a mountain fortress near the Caspian Sea, Hasan founded a sect to fight his political enemies by means of murder. Hasan and his followers were known as Nizaris and belonged to the Isma'ili branch of Shi'i Islam. For two centuries this secret organization terrorized the Middle East. Hasan, who gained the nickname Old Man of the Mountain from his fortress hideaway, is said to have given his followers a vision-inducing drug called hashish, made from Indian hemp. The visions of Islamic paradise brought on by the drug persuaded his disciples that they would have a glorious afterlife if they followed Hasan's orders and killed his enemies. The killers were called Hashshashin, the plural of an Arabic word meaning one who smokes hashish. This name was eventually corrupted into its present form, assassin. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a subdivision of a larger religious group k) a way by which something is done or obtained I) make someone submit by filling them with fear m) a substitute name, usually descriptive n) a hiding place or secluded spot o) having the power to cause hallucinations p) in the Qur'an, a wonderful garden of delights promised to the faithful after death q) a follower of a leader or ideal, especially religious, political, or philosophical r) splendid magnificent s) life after death t) finally after a long period of time u) made different from the original by errors or alterations 220 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The passage describes how Hasan-i-Sabbah A) sold the drug called hashish, which was made from Indian hemp B) founded the Isma'ili branch of Islam C) fought against Persian terrorists D) was eventually killed by one of his enemies E) established a group of Muslims called Nizaris 2. The group of killers referred to in the passage were originally called by a name meaning A) people who use a particular drug B) the old men of the mountain C) those headed for paradise D) great mountain fortress E) the secret order of Muslims 3. According to the passage, for two hundred years the Nizaris A) ran a drug smuggling operation which brought hashish from India B) led a secret life of silence and prayer as Isma'ili Shi'ites C) instilled fear in the inhabitants of the Middle East D) established a political system in the Islamic world E) built a magnificent fortress beside the Caspian Sea The word ghetto is from the old Italian word borghetto , meaning a settlement outside a walled city. 2. From 740 to 1050 AD, warriors known as Vikings coastal inhabitants from Finland in the North to Constantinople in the South. They made dawn raids, killing villagers, kidnapping youths, and stealing valuables. 3. Harriet Tubman escaped slavery in 1849 and helped many other slaves reach freedom. She was given the 4. Moses of her People . The folk hero Robin Hood reportedly lived in a/an in Sherwood Forest. His enemy, the evil Sheriff of Nottingham, never discovered where he and his men lived. 5. The of Mahatma Gandhi by a religious fanatic, who was angry at Gandhi's attempts to unite Hindus and Muslims, violently ended the life of one of the greatest leaders of non-violence of all time. ELS 221 Once a new technique is discovered and adopted, society does not attempt to revert to the former technique. The automobile displaced the horse the electric light replaced kerosene lamps sound movies replaced silent films and word processors are rapidly making typewriters obsolete. This forward march of technology is called progress. In the fine arts such progress does not exist. The skill of the artist rests upon knowledge and experience, just as the skill of the technician does. But the creative processes involved seem to be different. Today, for example, one can admire the design of a Roman chariot, but few people would ever want to depend on it as a regular means of transportation. By contrast, it is still possible to walk into the Vatican's Şistine Chapel and be astounded by the magnificence of Michelangelo's frescoes. These paintings have an excellence that will never become outmoded. A work of art, whether it is a painting by Titian or a concerto by Mozart, is not a steppingstone to something else that will someday be considered better. It is not like the vacuum tube, which served its purpose well enough until the transistor was invented. Each artwork stands on its own - distinctive for all time. Even poor imitations cannot damage the goodness and integrity of the original. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as amaze astonish greatly j) paintings with watercolours on walls or ceiling k) no longer in fashion I) a means to a better position m) works of art collectively n) characteristic different from others o) copy counterfeit p) perfection state of being faultless Tightness 222 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. We understand from the passage that Michelangelo's frescoes A) were produced using the latest technology of the time B) are hard to appreciate in this technological age C) were a steppingstone for him to produce better ones D) will some day lose their quality and value due to corrosion E) will not be discarded by the creation of similar works 2. The main focus of the passage is that A) a work of art retains its value forever while a technological product is subject to replacement B) advancements have always been faster in painting techniques compared to those in music C) the invention of the transistor has formed the basis of most technological development D) people prefer the comfort of using a new technological product to spending their money on by a better version works of art, which have no practical value E) the various techniques of artistic processes which enabled great works of art to be produced will some day be outmoded 3. It's clear from the passage that A) the move in technology is always forward B) works of art are more important for humanity than technological products C) some people have a tendency to revert to former periods D) it's easier to produce imitations of great works of art using technology E) no one has ever managed to produce better frescoes than Michelangelo 1. The new system for keeping customer records didn't seem to be working, so we 2. Of course, having a degree, she doesn't want to be a flight attendant all her life, but she is 3. Lowry was very to the old one. hoping that it will be a/an to a job in management in tourism. This highly individual style seemed simple, but on most of his paintings of Lancashire industrial scenes, there were dozens of matchstick human figures, which were all individual. 4. This isn't a real Rolex watch, but a cheap that I bought in a market in Thailand. 5. Her popularity on her ability to be hilariously funny. ELS 223 Bacall made her film debut opposite Bogart in To Have and Have Not (1944). Dubbed The Look for hersophisticated mannerisms and sultry eyes, Bacall was emulated by women across the United States. The real-life romance of the two stars further generated interest in the film. They married in 1945 and had two children. The popular couple, often referred to as Bogey and Bacall , went on to appear together in The Big Sleep (1946), Dark Passage (1947), and Key Largo (1948). Among Bacall's other early films were How to Marry a Millionaire (1953), Written on the Wind (1956), and Designing Woman (1957). Bogart, who was 25 years Bacall's senior, died of cancer in 1957. She married actor Jason Robards, Jr., in 1961, and they had a son together before divorcing in 1969. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as an actress's or actor's first appearance before the public k) (in film or theatre) in a complementary role I) named given a name (especially a nickname) m) not simple refined n) a peculiarity of manner in behaviour, speech, etc., that has become a habit o) attractive in a way expressing hidden passion p) imitate admiringly act the same as q) produce cause to be r) of the greater age older 224 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, American women A) thought Lauren Bacall was the most beautiful film star in history B) preferred Bogart to Jason Robards C) usually have sultry looks as did Lauren Bacall D) were jealous of Lauren Bacall's happy marriage E) wished to be like Lauren Bacall 2. We can conclude from the passage that Lauren Bacall A) married Humphrey Bogart although he had two children B) attained fame through Bogart's influential connections C) was not as happy in her second marriage as she had been in her first D) had a brief affair with Bogart while she was married to another man E) got divorced from her second husband because she couldn't forget Bogart 3. We learn from the passage that the romance of Bogey and Bacall A) led to their first film together being referred to as The Look B) heightened curiosity about their first film together C) was unique in the whole of American film history D) developed a long time before the film To Have and Have Not E) led to her divorce from actor Jason Robards in 1969 1. 2. Jazz alto saxophonist Charlie Parker was extremely influential in the 1940s and 1950s, and Summitt caused women's basketball to gain more hundreds of young saxophone players strove to 3. I was so in the 1980s. his unique style. by the lecture that I didn't talk to my friend once in order not to miss any part of it 4. Bette Midler had been a successful singer and theatre actress before she made her film at the age of 34, in a film called The Rose , which was released in 1979. 5. His family is against him marrying a woman who is ten years his ELS 225 In the 18th century, for example, it had been demonstrated that the addition of citrus fruits to the diet would prevent the development of scurvy. In the 19th century it was shown that substituting unpolished for polished rice in a rice-based diet would prevent the development of beriberi. In 1906 the British biochemist Frederick Hopkins demonstrated that foods contained necessary accessory factors in addition to proteins, carbohydrates, fats, minerals, and water. In 1911 the Polish chemist Casimir Funk discovered that the anti-beriberi substance in unpolished rice was an amine - a type of nitrogen-containing compound, so Funk proposed that it should be named vitamine - for vital amine . This term soon came to be applied to the accessory factors in general. It was later discovered that many vitamins do not contain amines at all, yet because of its widespread use, Funk's term continued to be applied, but the final letter e was dropped. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as suggest k) essential I) over a large area m) omit leave out 226 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The passage tells us that before the discovery of vitamins A) Frederick Hopkins advised taking proteins, carbohydrates, fats, and minerals B) polished rice was believed to be particularly healthy C) citrus fruits were not included in Western diets D) some specific foods were already recognized as helpful to health E) scurvy and beriberi were two major causes of death 2. According to the passage, the name vitamin is applied to accessory factors although A) Casamir Funk didn't find it appropriate B) minerals are just as important C) beriberi is caused by eating too much rice D) some of them are not vital in diet E) not all of them contain amines 3. From the information given in the passage, we can conclude that the lack of a certain type of nitrogen-containing compound in a diet A) may lead to the disease called beriberi B) is still very common in many parts of the world C) can be corrected by eating citrus fruits D) does not normally cause any health problems E) is common among those whose diet is rice-based 1 languages have two categories of nouns, masculine and feminine, and some, such as German and Latin, even have three, masculine, feminine, and neuter. 2. As the employees in the office got closer, they the use of Mr. and 3. Carbon unites with many elements to form a great variety of Ms. and began to address each other by their first names. that are found in such substances as coal, petroleum, fabrics, plastics, and rubber. 4. Susan lost five kilos by 5. The doctors have managed to a low calorie sweetener for sugar in her tea. three substances which are causing Trevor's asthma. ELS 227 His simple, inexpensive program of lifestyle changes - which featured a low-fat, primarily vegetarian diet, moderate aerobic exercise, and daily stress management contrasted sharply with such potentially risky treatments as bypass surgery, angioplasty, and cholesterol-lowering medication. The holistic regimen that Ornish recommended appeared not only to halt the progress of atherosclerosis - the buildup of fatty substances within the arteries - but actually to reverse it. Despite his reluctance to be labeled a guru, Ornish continued to gain enthusiastic converts following the publication in 1990 of his best-selling second book, Dr. Dean Ornish's Program for Reversing Heart Disease The Only System Scientifically Proven to Reverse Heart Disease Without Drugs or Surgery. Later highlights for Ornish included the publication of a third book, Eat More, Weigh Less Dr. Dean Ornish's Life Choice Program for Losing Weight Safely While Eating Abundantly, an invitation to the White House in 1993 and the announcement in August of the same year that Mutual of Omaha, an insurance company, would reimburse policyholders for the cost of participation in the program - the first time a major insurer had agreed to cover an alternative treatment for heart disease. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a) b) c) d) 228 ELS ._ \ ' ' . I Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Doctor Dean Ornish's program for fighting heart disease, as described by the author, A) B) C) D) E) involved easily-made changes to one's way of life was effective but incredibly expensive required the use of cholesterol-lowering medication was highly technical relied heavily on innovative surgery 2. One interesting thing that the author notes about this unconventional approach was A) B) C) D) E) that it not only stopped the accumulation of fatty substances in the arteries, but also lessened them that only one insurance company refused to pay for a patient to undergo this alternative treatment that it became popular very quickly although it was potentially risky the reluctance of people to try it, despite its low cost and simplicity that many people followed the program even though they were