sanatçının bu kez mini etekle korta çıkması ise şaşkınlık yarattı. The (multi-talented) performer (Hülya Avşar, arguably Turkey's most famous celebrity) who until today has worn shorts or a jogging suit to avoid giving 'free kicks' during her tennis matches, caused a stir by coming to the court in a mini skirt this time. color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter G The Turkish The Literal Eng- The 'Plain' lish Meaning English Meaning Comments and Examples gagasından yakalamak to catch/grab from the beak to have (sb) at one's mercy to have sb by the short and curlies... Art niyetli ortağını sonunda gagasından yakaladı. He finally caught his partner in his hidden intentions. gavura kızıp to be angry at a · to hurt oneself Hiç yüzünden ortak- 116 oruç yemek Christian and to break the Ramazan fast... to spite another lıktan ayrıldı gavura · to cut off your kızıp oruç yedi. He nose to spite separated from his your face partner for no good reason he cut off his nose to spite his face. gece silahlı gündüz külahlı at night with a gun, during the day with a conical hat... · leading a double life · having a 'Jekyll and Hyde' personality Geçmiş olsun. May it pass. Said to anyone May be used as who has suffered shown. a setback -- due to illness or adversity. In health-related situations, use this to say ‘Get Well Soon.' geçti Bor'un pazarı (sür eşşeği Niğde'ye) the bazaar at Bor is over (drive the stupid donkey to Niğde) You missed your chance, it's too late to do anything (about it) now. Onun ne yolda olduğu bilinmez gece silahlı gündüz külahlı gezer... It's unknown what he'll do (on what road he'll be) he's got two personalities... O mal çoktan satıldı, geçti Bor'un pazarı. That merchandize was sold a long time ago, you missed your chance (to buy it)… See The Best of the Idiom Stories too. gerek…gerek… gerek(se) 1. Whether… this same meaning thing, or that thing, or the other thing. 2. Both …this thing and that thing. · Gerek ben durayım, gerek siz durun, gerek o dursun, işin sonucu değişmez. Whether I stay, or you stay, or he stays, nothing's going to change. 117 · Bu haber, gerek Washington'da gerekse Moskova'da kötü bir hava yaratmıştır. This news has caused bad feeling in both Washington and Moscow. · Şimdiye kadar gerek kâfir, gerek müslüman teknelerini hep geçerdim. Up to now, whether it were a Christian ship or Muslim ship, I outran them all. · Gerek ben feryat edeyim, gerek siz feryat edin, gerek o feryat etsin, hepimiz dondurma için feryat ederiz. Whether I scream or you scream or she screams, we all scream for ice cream. geri çevirmek to turn back 1. [-ı/-i/-u/-ü] to return, give back, send back 2. [-ı/-i/-u/-ü] to reject, refuse to accept 3. [-ı/-i/-u/-ü] [-den,-dan] to turn sb away from Mehmet Ali Erbil'den boşanan Sedef Altıntaş, Mustafa Sandal'dan gelen klip teklifini, Ben artist miyim klipte oynayayım. diyerek geri çevirdi. Sedef Altıntaş (who is now divorced from Mehmet Ali Erbil [a popular all-round Turkish entertainer]) said of the offer from Mustafa Sandal (a popular Turkish 118 , and then she rejected the offer. geri kalan the back thing · the remainder, the rest (of), the leftovers · remaining Geri kalan zamanı ise, oğluna ayırırdı. As for the rest of the time, he reserved it for his son. geri kalmak to remain back · to stay behind, remain behind · (for a time piece) to be slow · underdeveloped Bir kaç geri kalmış Arap ülkesinin dışında faizsiz bankacılık sistemini uygulayan ülke var mı. Apart from a few underdeveloped Arab countries, is there a country [today] that has an interest-free banking system in place. gır gır geçmek to pass word word 1. [-le/la] to make fun of sb take the 'mickey' out of sb make a fool of sb 2. to waste time joking Şu kendini beğenmiş züppe ile gırgır geçmeye ne dersin. What do you say. Let's take the mickey out of this selfimpressed show-off. to throw navel · to belly dance · to be wild with joy · to use one's charms on sb Şarkıcı Adnan Şenses, plânlarda 'yeşil alan' olarak görülen arsayı satın alıp Başbakan Recep Tayyip Erdoğan'ın karşısında iki göbek attı ve imar iznini Also seen as gırgır geçmek. göbek atmak 119 kopardı. Singer Adnan Şenses bought land that was designated as 'environmentally protected' ('green area' in the plans), and (then) he bellydanced (threw two navels) for Prime Minister Erdogan, and plucked himself a building permit. gönlünü almak to take heart... to make up with, Pek çok değerli heto restore reladiye gönderip tions with... gönlünü aldı. He sent valuable gifts and restored relations. gönül eğlence heart amusement pastime, amusement Görmemişin oğlu olmuş, çekmiş çükünü koparmış. There was a son of an upstart, he pulled at [the child's] penis plucking it off. [That person is] May be used as without social shown. graces [he/she is] nouveau riche You can't take him 'nowhere' nice. This, with God's mercy, he sees and he will see This is all he/one Olanakları çok iyi will ever get. değerlendir görüp göreceğin rahmet budur. He gets the most out of situations considering the possibilities you won't see any more. Note This idiom is off-color. görüp göreceği rahmet bu O benim eşim değil, gönül eğlencem idi. She isn't my spouse, she's my pastime. See The Best of the Idiom Stories too. 120 göz açtırmamak to not cause an eye to open · to give no chance or respite · to give (sb) no chance to do anything else · Oruç korsanlık etmeye başladı. Rodos gemilerine göz açtırmıyordu. Oruç became a pirate. He gave no respite to the ships of Rhodes. · Ödevler, sınav hazırlıkları bu ay göz açtırmadı. His homework and exam preparations gave him no time for anything else this month. göz ağrısı eye ache one's old or first love or sweetheart See sample sentence at ilk göz ağrısı. göz altına almak See gözaltına almak. [-ı/-i/-u/-ü] göz ardı etmemek to not make/do eye back · to undervalue · to not pay sufficient attention to to eye paint to mislead, delude, deceive, hoodwink, pull the wool over sb's eyes Belediye seçimleri yaklaşırken, halkın gözünü boyamak için kazı ve yapı çalışmalarını yoğunlaştıran belediyeler İstanbul halkını canından bezdirdi. As municipal elections Also seen as gözardı etmemek. göz boyamak Also seen as gözünü boyamak. 121 approach, municipal leaders (who are intensifying public digging and construction works in order to hoodwink the people) are making life miserable for İstanbul residents. göz dağı vermek Also seen as gözdağı vermek. göz dikmek to give eye mountain · to threaten, menace, intimidate · to flame up with rage, to fume with rage · Liderlerinin çağrısı üzerine çeşitli kentlerden Kerkük'e gelen 5 bine yakın Şii, cuma namazında toplanarak Kürtler'e göz dağı verdi. Nearly 5 thousand [Iraqi] Shiite Muslims (who came to Kirkuk upon the call of their leaders from various cities) menaced the Kurds who had gathered for Friday prayers. · İstediği parayı vermezsem, çocuğumu öldüreceğini söyleyerek bana gözdağı vermeye çalıştı. She tried to threaten me by saying that she will kill my child, if I don't give her the money she wants. to set up eye · to set one's eye on · to covet · to long to possess Derviş Baykal'ın koltuğuna göz dikti. 122 political party). göz göre göre in one's opinion according to eye blatantly Duygu sömürüsü yaparak yardım isteyen uyanıklar, vatandaşları göz göre göre soyuyorlar. Clever [crooked] persons, who exploit the feelings of those who want to help, are blatantly robbing citizens. gözaltına almak to take under-eye · to put (sb) under house arrest · to put (sb) under surveillance Emirates Havayolları'na ait uçakla önceki gün Dubai'den İstanbul'a gelen Libyalı Tarehanad Elhaddad, gümrük kontolü sırasında şüphe çekince polisler tarafından gözaltına alındı. When Libyancitizen Tarehanad Elhaddad (who came to İstanbul from Dubai the other day in an airplane belonging to Emirates Airlines) attracted suspicion during the [airport] customs-control procedure, he was placed under surveillance by police. gözardı etmemek See göz ardı etmemek. gözden düşmek to fall from eye to fall into disfa- Pınar Altuğ'un askvor, to fall out of erde olan eşini 123 favor, to be disgraced aldatmasına hem kadınlar hem de erkekler tepki gösterdi ve halkın gözünden düştü. Both men and women [in the public] have shown a [negative] reaction to the cheating of [TV actress] Pınar Altuğ on her husband (when he was doing his military duty) and she has fallen out of favor. to pass by eye 1. to go over quickly, to glance over 2. to inspect, examine, scrutinize 3. to consider, amend, edit Turizm Bakanı, yurt dışına çıkışlarda alInan 50 dolar uygulamasını yeniden gözden geçireceklerini söyledi. The Tourism Minister said he would reconsider the 50 dollars [custom's payment] imposition that is [now] being taken from those who travel outside the country. gözden/gözlerden to escape from eye kaçmak to be overlooked, to not be noticed, to go unnoticed, to not be obvious to the eye Sovyetler Birliği'nin son lideri Mihail Gorbaçov emekliliğin tadını çıkarıyor. Ancak 72 yaşındaki Rus liderin iyice yaşlandığı gözlerden kaçmıyor. The Soviet Union's last leader Mikhail Gorbachev is getting the most out of his retirement. But it's gözden geçirmek 124 obvious to the eye that the 72-year-old Russian leader is ageing. gözden kaybetmek to lose from eye to lose sight of gözden kaybolmak to be lost from eye to disappear gözden uzaklaşmak to leave from eye lost from sight Gözüm çıksın. May my eyes go out. Believe me...I'm not lying to you. Gözüm çıksın yalanım varsa. May my eyes pop out if I'm lying. Gözüm seğiriyor My eyes are twitching, I hope Allah hayra (hayıra) çıkarsın. to God nothing bad is coming. I've got this bad feeling that sth will go wrong. May be used as shown. Üç arkadaş, ovanın ucunda gözden kayboldular. [His] Three friends disappeared over the horizon [at the far end of the plain]. gözünü boyamak See göz boyamak. gözünü [daldan] budaktan (çöpten) sakınmamak (esirgememek) not to avoid (protect) the eye from the knot (twig) from the branch to disregard dangers, not to be afraid of dangerous/difficult situations, to be fearless Çok cesaretli ve atılgandır, gözünü daldan budaktan sakınmaz. She's very plucky and enterprising, and not afraid of difficulties. gözünü toprak doyursun you dirt-fill the eye Nothing on earth can satisfy you./ Your greed is insatiable. 'Asıl çiftçi düşmanı Bakanın gözünü toprak doyursun.' 'Actually, it's the greed of the [Agricultural] Minister (who is the 125 enemy of the farmers) that is insatiable.' Gözün(üz) aydın. Your eyes light... I'm happy for you./ Congratulations. (said only for a happy event that has been awaited, like the arrival of your family member back from a trip.) Gözün aydın, torunun olmuş. Congratulations, [I hear that] you have a grandchild. to pull difficulty to have difficulty O hurda otobüsle (in) geldik. Geldik ama, çok güçlük çektik. We came in that broken-down bus. Yeah... we came all right, but we had a lot of difficulty. güçlük çıkarmak to remove difficulty to make, cause, Bu adam işimizde or raise difficul- güçlük çıkardı. This ties, or problems guy caused us a lot of problems on our job. güçlük çekmek Güle güle. To smile to smile. idiom used to May be used as say 'Good-bye' -- shown. by the person staying at a location Güle güle kullan/kullanın/ kullanınız. Use smiling smil- Enjoy it. (Said ing. to sb who has recently acquired sth.) May be used as shown. gün doğmadan neler doğar what things are born before sunrise May be used as shown. a lot can happen between now and then 126 gündeme gelmek to come to the agenda · to become a current issue · to become the main issue or point · to become the center of attention Eleştirmen, Naomi Campbell defilelerinde elbiseyi değil, vücudunu sergiliyor. Yani kadınlığını kullanıyor Bu sayede gündeme geliyor, diye konuştu. The critic said, Naomi Campbell displays her body, not the garment in fashion shows. By that I mean, she's using her femininity -- so that becomes the center of attention. gününü gün etmek for day to make/do day to be really enjoying oneself, to be having a hell of a good time Fedon'u genç sevgilisiyle görenler, Çapkınlıkta eline kimse su dökemez. Çıtır sevgilisiyle gününü gün ediyor dediler. Those who saw Fedon (a famous but ageing Turkish singer) with his young lover said, When it comes to womanizing, no one can hold a candle to him. He's really enjoying himself with his crispy [new] lover. gürül gürül · with a loud roaring sound -rumblingly, thunderously · with a loud strong voice, boomingly same meanings Kitapdan gürül gürül okudu. He read from the book in a good strong voice. 127 güvendiği dağlara kar yağmak for it to snow on to be sadly distrusted mountains appointed to not receive the help or support of sb you trust Babasının onu her zaman destekleyeceğini umuyordu, oysa bu kez güvendiği dağlara kar yağdı. She was expecting always that her father would support her, but this time she was sadly disappointed. color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter H The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning Comments and Examples ha Ali Hoca, ha Hoca Ali it's either Ali Hoca or it's Hoca Ali · It doesn't matter which of two [bad] things happens -- because they are both about the same. · It's six of one and a half dozen of the other... Arada bir ayrım yok, ha Ali Hoca ha Hoca Ali, ikisi de aynı. Sometimes I don't see a difference, it's either Ali Hoca or it's Hoca Ali, and the two [options] are the same. ha bire come on now to one · without ever stopping · all the time · Adam ha bire bunların iyi cins fidan olduklarını ve gelecek yıl meyve bile vereceklerini anlatıp durmuş. The man, without stopping, began explaining that the good breeds of plant were even going to give her fruit the next year. · See another example sen- 128 tence at ahkâm kesmek. haberi olmak to become the to be informed news of to know about to find out information (about sth) 'e-blaster' adı verilen bir program sayesinde eşinizin internette attığı her adımdan, yazdığı her e-mailden haberiniz oluyor. Thanks to the program called 'e-blaster', you can be informed of every step that your spouse takes on the internet, about every e-mail he/she writes. [-a/-e] haddini bildirmek to inform (to the) limit to put sb in his/her place · Kendisini İspanyol zulmünden kurtardığımız nankör Tlemsen sultanına haddini bildirmek gerek. It's necessary for the Sultan to put the disloyal Tlemsen, who we had saved from Spanish oppression, in his place. · See another example sentence at ipe sapa gelmez. haddini bilmemek for one to not know the limit for one to be presumptuous, impertinent, uppity İspanya kralı'nın bana böyle hitap etmesi gayet haddini bilmemezliktir. The Spanish king is exceedingly presumptuous to address me like that. Hadi canım sen de. Come on, and · Who do you you. think you're kidding. · Don't feed me that bull. AKP'nin adalet ve kalkınması bu mu. Hadi canım sen de. Don't feed me that bull. Hak Taalâ (Teala) God almighty Affeyledim zira, Hak Taalâ affedici kullarını severmiş. I forgive you same meaning 129 because God Almighty loves a slave forgiver. hakkını helal etmek to give up one's rights to give one's blessing Hoşça kalın kardeşler, hakkınızı helal edin. Goodbye brothers and sisters, give me your blessing. haklı olmak to become right to be 'in the right' Yapılan araştırmalara göre, Amerikalı kadınların yüzde 60'ı en az bir kez evlilik dışı ilişki kuruyor ve bunda haklı olduğuna inanıyor. According to research that's been done, 60 percent of American women have at least one extramarital affair -- and they believe they are in the right to do so. Halep orada ise (oradaysa) arşın burada. If Allepo is over there, the arşın (unit of measurement) is over here. · Try that and see what happens to you. · Well, prove it. · Put up or shut up. · The conditions necessary to evaluate are now in place. Söylediğin koşullar hazır haydi dediğini burada da yap Halep oradaysa arşın burada. Your stated conditions of comparison are now in place come on then... do what you said [you could do]. If Aleppo is over there, the arşın measurement is over here. haline gelmek to come to a condition · to become, to become like · to come into possession of · İtalyan Bakan Rocco Bittiglione, Türkiye'yi demokrasi değil asker yönetiyor. Fakat Türk ordusu, bu etkinliğini sürdürmelidir. Eğer kontrol elden çıkarsa Türkiye bir İslam Cumhuriyeti haline gelir. Askerler 130 politikadan el çekmemelidir diye konuştu. Italian Minister Rocco Bittiglione said, Turkey is not a democracy, it's controlled by the military. But the Turkish army. must continue this activity. If the [army] gives up control, Turkey would become an Islamic State. The military must not withdraw from [Turkish] politics. · Kırk ambar haline geldiler. They came into possession of forty granaries. halis muhlis pure sincere genuine, true Şaka etme, dedim, Bu halis muhlis Çerkez. Don't joke around, I said, That's a genuine Caucasian (Circassian) [woman]. Note Caucasian (Circassian) women were highly regarded because of their 'astonishing' beauty in Ottoman times... hamamda deli var there's a madman in the Turkish bath there's a dangerous commotion in an area of interest to you, so protect yourself from willfully destructive people Dikkatli olun hamamda deli var, işimizi baltalıyor. Be careful, there's trouble brewing -- and someone can wreck our business. haraca bağlamak to be tied to protection money to force (sb) to pay protection money Cezayir'in yedi sekiz köyünü Kadıoğlu alıp haraca bağlamıştı. Kadi- 131 oğlu captured 7 or 8 villages around Algiers and forced (them) to pay protection money. hariçten gazel (it's forbidokumak/atmak den) to read/throw (yasaktır) except for newspapers · to offer one's ideas on a subject without knowing anything about it (is forbidden) · to break rudely into a conversation (is forbidden) · to behave like a 'know it all' (is forbidden) Bir konuya, hiç ilgisi yokken, kendisine söz düşmezken, dışardan katılmak da hariçten gazel okumaktır. To enter without being asked (from the outside) into a topic [of conversation] when one has no [connected] interest and no (personal) right to voice an opinion, is acting like a 'know it all'. hasret gitmek to go longing to die without seeing sb/sth one last time Zavallı adam Almanya'daki kızına hasret gitti. The poor old guy died before having a last chance to see his daughter in Germany. hasret kalmak to remain longing to miss (sb/sth) a lot/greatly to feel the absence of Aşık olmaya hasret kaldım. I miss being in love a lot. hatır için for memory as a favor Amma senin güzel hatırın için onun suçunu affettik. But as a favor to you, we also forgave his guilt. hatırı kalmak to remain one's sensitivities to feel hurt or offended Hey Oruç, sana biraz hatırım kalmıştı. Ama affeyledim. Hey Oruç, you hurt my feelings but I forgive you. hava atmak to throw air to show off, to Alberto Giannigi adlı brag about a su- genç, ünlü sanatçı Jenni- 132 periority which may be real or imagined havadan sudan from air from water havalanmak to be aired, to be ventilated at random, of this and that In the case of a woman to 'show off', to put on airs/ affectations, to act in a manner that puts one's sexuality on display, to act flirtatiously, to dress in a provocative way to attract male attention... In the case of a male to 'show off', to act like a womanizer, a boozer, a gambler to live a wild life, to have a changeable temperment fer Lopez'in bal mumundan yapılmış heykelinin arkasına geçerek poz verdi. Belki bu fotoğrafı ülkesinde arkadaşlarına gösterip hava atacak. A guy named Alberto Giannigi made this pose in passing behind the wax-likeness of Jennifer Lopez the famous performer. Perhaps he planned to show this photo to friends in his home country and do [some] bragging. 133 havasını almak to take air · to breathe fresh air · to absorb/take in air · to end up getting nothing, go home emptyhanded See example sentence at kılını (bile) kıpırdatmamak. disappointment See examples in following panels... hayal kırıklığı- to drop in on imaginana uğramak tion brokenness to be disappointed Saşırdım hayal kırıklığına uğradım. I was confused and disappointed. hayal kırıklığı- to cause sb to drop in na uğratmak on imagination brokenness to cause disappointment Meclislerin Türkiye konusundaki tutumu beni hayal kırıklığına uğrattı. · I hope nothing's wrong... · What's up. Geç kaldın. Hayrola. You're late. Is ever-ything OK. I hope so. · I hope nothing's wrong... · What on earth is this. · I hope this doesn't mean sth bad is going to happen (said of a bad dream). Similar to Hayrola. Good luck on Said when you are seen to hayal kırıklığı Hayır ola. or Hayrola. imagination/ illusion brokenness For good reason it happens. Note the latter is the 'street' pronunciation. Hayırdır inşal- It is good, God willing. lah. or just plain Hayırdır. Hayırlı işler. Works with Similar to Hayırdır inşallah. Müşteri Çabuk bana 8 tane votka getir. Barmen Hayırdır birader. Customer Quick bring me 8 shots of Vodka. Barmen [Oh my] brother, I hope nothing's wrong. 134 health. your new endeavor. be starting sth new, like a job... Hayırlı ola. Let it be good. Good luck, may Mehmet Gitmeliyim, it go well. derim. Fatma Hayırlı ola. Mehmet I have to go, I say. Fatma Good Luck. [on your journey...] Hayırlı olsun. Let be with health. Good luck. Congratulations. [Said, for example, on the opening of a new business, to the proprietor.] This idiomatic phrase is very similar to the one above and, like that one, it is also used on its own. hayra alamet benefit sign a good sign Bu hayra alamet değildir. Gel, vazgeç. This is not a good sign. Come, give it up. hayrete düşmek to fall to amazement to be amazed, be astonished Bir zamanlar moda olan altın dişler, geri geliyor. Hem de öyle bir geliyor ki görenleri hayrete düşürecek... Gold teeth (that were once in fashion) are making a comeback. And it's such a [spirited] comeback that observers will be astonished... Hem de nasıl. Both and how. · · · · And how. You said it. Absolutely. Oh boy, do I. Soru Dondurma seviyor musun. Cevap Hem de nasıl. Question Do you like ice cream. Answer And how. hem kel, hem fodul (to be both) bald and vain said of sb who makes great claims for him- Bırak böyle konuşmayı, yaptıkların ortada, senin gibilere hem kel hem 135 Her gün (zaman/vakit) papaz pilav yemez. self, but who lacks competence in reality fodul derler. Quit talking like that, the things you do are [no more than] average. They call people like you both bald and vain . · Don't waste a rare opportunity. · Don't ask sb too often for a favor. They'll get fed up. · Things don't always go the way you'd like. May be used as shown. Every sheep The trouble hangs from its people get own leg. themselves into is usually of their own making. May be used as shown. Everything is on the road May be used as shown. The priest doesn't eat rice everyday (always). Serves both as an idiom and a proverb. Her koyun kendi bacağından asılır. Serves as both an idiom and a proverb. Her şey yolunda. Her yiğidin bir There is a way of eating yoğurt yiyişi yogurt for vardır. every young Serves as both man. an idiom and a proverb. hesap kitap arithmetic book Everything is fine All is OK. Everyone likes May be used as shown. his/her own way of doing things. · after careful consideration · after full consideration · a financial book account/work 136 [-dan, -den] hesap sormak to ask arithmetic to call sb to account Şehit anaları ayaklandı Vurdumduymaz siyasilerden mutlaka hesap sorulmalı. Mothers of martyred soldiers are on their feet (in protest) Our thick-headed politicians must surely be brought to account. hesapsız without arithmetic unthinkable Çok hesapsız gidiyorsun. Böyle devam edersen ayın sonunu getiremezsin..You're using up [your money] at an unthinkable [rate]. If you continue like that, you'll never make it to the end of the month. hıncını almak to take grudge to get one's revenge Also seen as hınç almak. hıncını çıkarmak to remove to take revenge grudge (from) (on) vent one's spleen (on) Amerika şimdi her işi yokuşa sürüyor, her fırsatta hıncını çıkarmaya çalışıyor. Now, America is making every task an uphill struggle, using every opportunity to take revenge. [-ı/-i/-u/-ü] hiçe saymak to count to never İngiliz Daily Star Gazetesi dün Dünya Güzeli, çirkin fare Hewitt'i hiçe saydı başlığıyla olaya geniş yer verdi. Yesterday, the British Daily Star Newspaper gave wide coverage to the event with the headline, A World Beauty [Turkish beauty-queen Azra Akın] completely ignored · to ignore/ disregard (sb/sth) completely · to regard (sb/sth) as completely unimportant · to take no notice of (sb/sth) 137 the dirty rat James Hewitt [Princess Diana's one-time lover, turned tabloid tattletale]. ... open-space · Come on and try it. · I dare you to try it. Başbakan Erdoğan, seçime gidilmesi halinde partisinin daha güçlü çıkacağını belirterek, 'Hodri meydan' dedi. [Turkish] Prime Minister Erdoğan said, Come on and try it, I dare you -while making it clear that his [AKP] party would emerge [even] stronger, in the event of a new election. Hoş geldin(iz) You come pleasant. Welcome. You'll hear this every time you arrive at sb's house or place of bus-iness, and the response you should give is 'Hoş bulduk.' (Lit. Well found. Fig. It's nice to be here.) [-ın,-in, -un,-ün] hoş(un)a gitmek to go to pleas- · (for sth) to be ant [of] pleasing (to sb) · (for sb) to like (sth) hodri meydan Note 'hodri' has no meaning except in this idiom. Also see zevkine gitmek. · Aşırı sıcaklık yüzünden insanlar öylesine bunaldılar ki, çırılçıplak soyunup sokakta dolaşanlar bile var. Bu durum en çok sokaklarda çıplak dolaşan kadınları seyreden erkeklerin hoşuna gidiyor. Because of the extreme heat, people are so distressed that some strollers even undress and go naked in the street. Men (who, in this situation, can view naked woman strolling in most streets) like it [a lot]. 138 · Hoşuma gidiyor. I like it. color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter I The Turkish The Lit- The 'Plain' Eng- Comments and Exeral lish Meaning amples English Meaning ıcığını cıcığını çıkarmak to remove 'ıcığını cıcığını' [...is a Turkishdoublet that has no meaning except when used in this (or the next) idiom.] · to study (sth) very closely -- in the minutest detail, to research sth rigorously, to deeply probe a question, to get to the root (of sth) · to criticize the smallest details (of sth) Tüm raporları inceledim, her belgenin, her yazının ıcığını cıcığını çıkardım. I examined all the reports I studied every document and every article in the minutest detail. ıcığını cıcığını sormak to ask 'ıcığını cıcığını' [...is a Turkishdoublet that has no meaning except when · to investigate all the peculiarities/characteristic s of sb (or some subject) · to do research in order to thoroughly learn about a person's family background, his/her Evleneceğim adamın soyunu sopunu, mal varlığını, kişiliğini yani ıcığını cıcığını sordum. I have thoroughly investigated the family background, the family wealth, and the personality of the man I'm going to marry. He's a 'fine' person. 139 ıkınıp sıkınmak Also seen as çok ıkınıp sıkınmak. ısıtıp ısıtıp önüne koymak (getirmek) used in this (or the previous) idiom.] basic nature and disposition to strain (while defecating or during childbirth) and to restrain oneself to make an effort with difficulty (or reluctantly) -- due to one's shyness, respect, fear, dislike, or scruple Çok ıkındı sıkındı, ama sevdiği kıza bir türlü sevdiğini söyleyemedi. He made every effort but (because of his shyness), he just couldn't find a way to tell his beloved girlfriend that he loved her. to warm and warm and put to the front to continuously repeat stories about the past to the point of weariness Çocukluğunda geçirdiği o olayı ısıtıp ısıtıp önüne koyuyor. He keeps repeating that boring story about what happened in his childhood. · junk, worthless things · trifles, unimportant things · nonsense, bunk Pazar yerinde satılan ıvır zıvırları doldurmuş. It's filled with junk that's sold at the bazaar. ıvır zıvır ... … [A Turkish-doublet that has no meaning except in this idiom.] color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter İ The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' Comments and English Mean- Examples ing içine atmak to throw to · to keep (a See example sentence at 140 the inside worry or prob- yerle bir etmek. lem) to oneself · to store away in one's memory (an insult that one has appeared to disregard) to be born to the inside to have an intuitive feeling that, have a feeling (that sth is going to happen) Besmele ile önündeki kağıda bir şeyler çiziktirmeye başlayan yaşlı adamın içine doğmuş, birden, Ya hatun, demiş, senin yüzüğün bir hayvan kursağında görünüyor. Saying the Islamic formula [see Bismillâ...], the old man started scribbling on the paper in front of him and suddenly had an inspiration. Ah dear lady, he said, it seems your ring was swallowed by an animal in your garden. to not go to be extremely içtikleri su ayrı gitmemek (gitmez) separately close the water [friends/lovers] they drank Helga, bir zamanlar içtikleri su ayrı gitmeyen eski arkadaşı Hortensia'ya sevgilisi Malcom'u kaptırmanın acısını hâla unutamadı. Helga, who was once very close [to Hortensia], still can't forget the pain of Hortensia's stealing away her old lover Malcom. iddiayı kaybetmek to lose claim Köyün en zeki adamları iddiayı kaybedip içine doğmak to lose a bet 141 komik duruma düştüler. The smartest guys in the village have lost the bet and been ridiculed. [-ın, -in, -un, -ün] iki ayağını bir pabuca sokmak put two feet into one shoe · to pressure sb · to put pressure on (sb) (to do sth immediately) Çocuklar erkenden kalktılar. Daha kahvaltı bile yapmadan oyuncakçı dükkanına gitmek için, babalarının iki ayağını bir pabuca soktular. The children go up early. Without even having breakfast, they put pressure on their father about going to the toystore. · iki cami arasında kalmış beynamaza dönmek to fail religious duties between two mosques · said of sb who can't choose between two or more alternatives · to be confused, perplexed · to not know what you will do not to know which side to appproach from Uzun süredir iki cami arasında kalmış beynamaza döndü. He took a long time -- unable to make up his mind which choice to make. · iki cami arasında kalmış beynamaz gibi · iki cami arasında kalan bir namaz iki çift laf (söz) etmek to make/do to say a few See example sentence at two double words (to sb) şıp diye. word to have a word or two (with sb) iki ucu boklu değnek a stick · totally bad with shit at situation from both ends which there are no escapes This idiom is off- Doların düşük olması kimini sevindiriyor, kimini üzüyor iki ucu pis değnek. Some peo- 142 color. · a problem that ple are pleased by the doesn't seem to dollar's fall, some are have a solution distressed [about it] it's a stick with two dirty ends. (This cleaned up version of the idiom appeared in a Turkish newspaper.) ikide bir one in two constantly, very Bu işi bitiriverelim frequently, all ikide bir gelip başımıza the time ekşimesin. Let's finish this work quickly -- then it won't constantly come to burden us. ileri sürmek to drive to the front · to speak one's thoughts (about a subject) · to have a proposal(s) · to want to gain acceptance of an idea · to put forward to put forth to bring out · to drive (sb/sth) forward ilgi çekmek to pull re- to attract attenlation/ tion connection Also see dikkat çekmek. [who told the [girl's] mother, She can't pass the course without private lessons ] were heartbreaking. · Geçtiğimiz mayıs ayından itibaren tarifeli seferlerine başlayan 'Naked-Air' beklenenden büyük ilgi çekti. 'Naked-Air' (which began scheduled trips starting last May) 143 has attracted a lot of attention from those who are waiting (to try it). · See another example sentence at zaman zaman. ilk göz ağrısı first eye heavy Note this idiom is sometimes shortened to göz ağrısı. imza atmak/etmek to throw signature · first love · first and only love · firstborn child İlk göz ağrımsın çocuklarımın da babasısın neden senden ayrılayım. Why should I separate from you, you are the father of my children and my first and only love. to write one's signature to sign Erdoğan, 23 Mart'ta Aile dostunun şeriatçı terörist olduğuna dair hazırlanan Bakanlar Kurulu kararına imza attı. [Prime Minister] Erdoğan signed a declaration prepared by the Council of Ministers (on 23 March 2003) acknowledging that his family friend [in a 1985 photo] was the Muslim fundamentalist terrorist. · Hopefully · I hope so. · If nothing unforeseen occurs May be used as shown. [You will hear this traditional idiom all the time in Turkey -- multiple times each day.] İnşallah God willing... ipe sapa gelmez for the · confused, inrope not to consistent İpe sapa gelmez laflar eden bu kendini bil- 144 come to the handle · idiotic, nonsensical · vagabond, shiftless mezlere haddini bildirecek kimse yok mu. Bu soysuzları Amerika susturmazsa biz susturmasını biliriz. Isn't there anyone who will put these fools (who speak such idiotic words) in their place. If America can't shut them up we know how to do it. ipe un sermek to spread wool to rope · to make a lot of excuses, to erect barriers, to set needless conditions -- in order to avoid doing sth · to string sb along with promises · to be lazy · Yapamayacaksan açık söyle, ipe un serme. If you're not going to be able do (it), say so openly. Don't make a bunch of excuses. · İşimizi görmeye niyeti yok, ipe un seriyor. He has no intention of considering our business, he's just stringing us along... ipimle kuşağım, sikimle taşağım my robe and my sash, my penis and my testicles · the things I need, everything I need · my basic needs · an idiom that is quite obviously genderspecific Enflasyon, menflasyon derdim değil. Ipimle kuşağım, sikimle taşağım. Fakir düşünsün. I'm not worried about inflation and other such woes. I've got the things I need. Let the [really] poor think about such things. iple çekmek to pull with rope to be anxiously awaiting for to be counting the days until See example sentence at kozunu paylaşmak. ister istemez he/she 1. like it or not Başbakan Meclis This is an off-color idiom... 145 wants, he/she doesn't want 2. as soon as requested · iş işten geçti · iş işten geçmeden · he passed from job to job · without passing from job to job · for it to be too late to do anything about · before it's too late işi yokuşa sürmek to drive work to [an] upward slope to make things difficult to make problems/ difficulties (for) to find various excuses for not doing some task or job işin içinden sıyrılmak to be grazed from work's inside to escape from See example sentence at a difficult situa- kırk dereden, etc. tion to get out of doing sth complicated içinden olmalıdır. Çünkü Türkiye'de demokratik sistem oturmamıştır ve demokrasi dışı güçler ister istemez harekete geçebiliyor. 'The Prime Minister must be [selected] from inside [the ranks of] the Turkish Parliament. Because [otherwise], our fragile democracy can be subjected to [unhealthy] foreign influences, whether we like it or not.' Önceden yardımcı olacağını söylediği halde işi yokuşa sürdü. Although he said earlier that he was going help, he [just] made difficulties [for us]. 146 işin püf noktası See püf noktası. işten bile değil it's not even work it's as easy as pie... Bu furyada bir saatte üç kilo balık yakalamak işten bile değil. In this run (of fish), it's as easy as pie to catch three kilos of fish. said to wish you well when you buy sth new... May be used as shown. don't know ungratefulness goodness Ey hain. Kendini ne sandın. Işte iyilik bilmeyenin sonu budur. Hey traitor. What do you think of yourself. Look, this is the end of your ungratefulness. iyi günlerde kullan use in good days Similar to güle güle kullan. iyilik bilmeyen color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter J The Turkish 1. jeton düştü 2. jeton geç düştü The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning Comments and Examples 1. (Now) I understand, (Now) I get it. [Br. The penny's (finally) dropped.] 2. It took a while for me (you, him, her) to catch on. May be used as shown. 147 color bar color bar color bar color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter K The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' Comments and English Mean- Examples ing kabak başına/başında patlamak for a squash to explode to/on the head to bear the brunt of sth to get the blame for sth Bu olaylarda onların suçu vardı. Ama kabak yine benim başıma patladı... In these matters, they are the guilty parties. But I'm getting the blame again... kabak tadı vermek to give the flavor of squash (the vegetable) · to become boring or uninteresting · for sth to lose its appeal · Ahmet'in askerlik hikayeleri, artık bana kabak tadı verdi. Ahmet's war stories have finally started to bore me. · Yeter artık, kabak tadı verdin. That's enough of that, you've become boring. kabul etmek to do/make acceptance · to accept (as) consent (to) agree (to) to acquiesce (in) · to receive (sb) 1299 yılı Osmanlı'nın bağımsızlık, dolayı-sıyla da kuruluş yılı kabul edilmişti. 1299 has been accepted as the year of independence, and consequently, the founding year of the Ottoman [Empire]. 148 kafa tutmak to hold head to challenge, defy (sb/sth) Bir sıkımlık canı var, herkese kafa tutuyor. He's such a weakling, [but even so] he challenges everyone. kaldı ki he/she/it remains that moreover Kaldı ki açık denizler yıllanmış gemicilere bile boyun eğdirir. Moreover, the open seas even humiliate experienced sailors. [-ı/-i/-u/-ü] kaleme almak to take to the pencil to write out, put down on paper See example sentence at foyası meydana çıkmak. kalıplaşmış stereotyped (a) cliché Öyleyse ikilemeleri oluşturan sözcükler, ancak belirli bir sıraya göre kalıplaşmış olarak kullanılabilirler. In that case, words that form 'doublets' may be called clichés -- but only if they are in a specific order. kalleşlik etmek to do/make treachery to leave sb in the lurch, to stab sb in the back to play a dirty trick on sb ...her fırsatta Türkiye'ye kalleşlik yapmayı, arkadan vurmayı alışkanlık haline getiren Almanya'nın AB temsilcisini... ...the German Representa-tive to the EU who habitually hits Turkey from behind and stabs Turkey in the back... kambersiz/ kanbersiz düğün olmaz (olur mu.) The wedding isn't possible without Kamber/ Kanber. Of course, he/she cannot be left out or passed over. Ayşe Nesrin'i partiye çağırdın mı. Fatoş Elbette, o benim en yakın arkadaşım. Kambersiz düğün olur mu. Ayşe Note In this idiom, except at 149 the beginning of a sentence, there is no need to capitalize Kamber/Kanber (a man's name) -because it has become part of the vernacular. Did you invite Nesrin to the wedding party. Fatoş Of course... She's my closest friend. Do you think I'd throw a wedding party without her. kanına girmek to enter to blood · to have blood on one's hands · to deflower a young woman · to damage, destroy Boş yere o kadar Müslüman'ın kanına girdi. He spilled a lot of Muslim blood in vain. kaparo yatırmak to put earnest money to bed to make a down-payment Fiyatı henüz kesinleşmeyen ama 470 bin Euro olması beklenen otomobil için Türkiye'den bir müşterinin kaparosunu yatırdığı ve muhtemelen yılbaşında otolmobili alacağı öğrenildi. It's been learned that a customer from Turkey has paid the down-payment and will probably take posse-sion at New Year's time of [a new Mercedes model] automobile (that is expected to cost 470 thousand Euros but which doesn't yet have a definite final price-tag). kara gün dostu black day friend a foul-weather friend (a friend you can count on, even in 'foul-weather') Ben ak gün dostu değilim. Kara gün dostuyum. I'm not a fairweather friend. I'm a friend in foul-weather 150 [too]. Karadenizde gemilerin mi battı. Have your ships sunk in the Black Sea. It's a sheep Karaman'ın koyunu, sonra çıkar from Karaman, oyunu. the trick Note Any will come person's name may out later. be substituted for 'Karaman' above... · Are you depressed. · Are you upset about sth. May be used as shown. · There's sth doubtful about this [person]. You'd better watch out. · Said about sb who may say one thing but do another. · Said about sb who may try to pull the wool over your eyes. Dikkat et... Lorenzo'nun koyunu, sonra çıkar oyunu. Be careful... Lorenzo seems nice enough on the surface, but you can't be sure of his motives. See The Best of the Idiom Stories too. karar vermek to give a decision · to decide · to arrive at a decision Yeni iş arayışına giriştiklerinde, zevk için girdikleri ve harikalar yarattıkları mutfaklarda mutluluğu bulunca, aşçılığı meslek edinmeye karar verdiler. When they began searching for new work, and when they found pleasant entrance (possibilities) and happiness in producing wonders in the kitchen, they decided to take up the profession of chef. karda gezip (yürüyüp) izini belli etmemek to walk on snow and not leave an obvious footprint/ · to do sth 'inappropriate' with an expertise and in such a way that no Çok kurnaz, karda gezip (yürüyüp) izini belli etmiyor. She's very cunning, she walks on snow and doesn't leave a 151 trace one will know trace. about it · to do sth secretly without anyone knowing intuitively · to cover your tracks when you do sth inappropriate karga tulumba etmek/götürmek to do/ carry · for several crow pump people to grab and then lift another person into the air · for several people to carry sb by force karman çorman [These words are individually meaningless.] ... ... Ahlâksız soyguncu adliyeye karga tulumba götürüldü. Headline A churlish highwayrobber was carried by force to the courthouse. in utter confusion, in complete disarray, very messy Karun kadar mal to be as rich as Kasahibi olmak run (a man mentioned in the Koran who may be Croesus) to as rich as Croesus Bu adam Karun kadar mal sahibi olduğu halde son derece cimriydi. This man who was as rich as Karun/Croesus, was extremely stingy. [-ı/-i/-u/-ü] kasıp kavurmak · to tyrannize, oppress, terrorize, dominate · to ruin, destroy · Amerikalı Rap şarkıcı Lil Kim'in askısı kayınca şarkısını ortada kalan göğüslerini kapatmadan söyledi. Şimdi 'açık göğüs' akımının sahneleri kasıp kavurması bekleniyor. When American Rapper to take in and roast 152 Lil Kim's strap slipped, she rapped [the rest of] her number without covering her breasts that were in plain view. Now, the 'open breast' trend is expected to dominate stage performances. · Bütün Türkiye'yi kasıp kavuran hava sıcaklıkları İstanbul'da yerini yağmur ve serin havaya bıraktı. The hot weather (that has oppressed all of Turkey) has been replaced in İstanbul by rain and cool (temperatures). kaş yapayım der- to pluck out ken göz çıkarmak an eye while sayAlso seen as ing, I'll do kaş yaparken göz the eyeçıkarmak. brow. to make matters worse while trying to be helpful Bilmediğin işe karışma. Radyoyu tamir edeceğim diye tamamen bozma. Kaş yapayım derken, göz çıkarma. Don't get involved in a job you know nothing about. Don't break the radio completely saying you'll repair it. You'll make matters worse trying to be helpful. kaşla göz arasında between eye and eyebrow · in a flash · in a split second · in the blinking of an eye · in a very short time Kaşla göz arasında soyulmuşlar. They were robbed in the blinking of an eye. kavgaya tutuşmak for argument to catch fire to begin quarreling with each other 153 tora kadar hiç kimseyle uzlaşamıyor. Sorunlara çözüm bulacağına toplumun her kesimiyle kavgaya tutuştu. They've begun quarreling with every sector of the society that could help resolve problems. kayıtsız şartsız without enrollment without condition unconditionally, with no reservations whatsoever, with no strings attached Ancak bu istem politikası yüzünden, İngiltere dışında ülkeler tarafından kayıtsız şartsız kabul görmedi. But this demand was not accepted (did not see acceptance) unconditionally by countries other than the UK (England) because of politics. kazaya rıza consent to accident submission to one's fate Kazaya rızadan başka çare yoktu. There was nothing he could do but submit to his fate. kazık atmak kazık atmamak · to throw stake · to not throw stake · to cheat, swindle, to sell sth at an exorbitant price · not to do those things (above) Antalya Talya Oteli'nin ayakkabı boyacısı Turiste atılan kazık ülkeye atılmış sayılır diyor. The shoeshine man at the Tayla Hotel in Antalya says, You rip off the country when you rip off the tourists. 154 Kazın ayağı öyle değil. The goose's · It's not like foot is not that at all. like that. · The truth of the matter is quite a different thing. keçileri kaçırmak to help the goats escape Sen öyle sanıyorsun ama kazın ayağı öyle değil. That's what you think, but the truth of the matter is quite a different thing. · to go crazy · to go into a mad frenzy Oturduğum eski evin her yanında akrep, yılan ve fareler vardı. Biraz daha o evde kalsaydım, keçi-leri kaçıracaktım. In the old house that I lived in, there were scorpions, snakes, and mice everywhere. If I'd stayed in that house a little longer, I was going to go crazy. kel başa şimşir tarak (yakışmamak) a boxwood comb (inappropriate ) to a bald head In these circumstances, this expensive thing is completely out of place (inappropriate). Kızım sana da hayret ediyorum, ayağına giyecek ayakkabın yok, gidip ipek çorap alıyorsun. Kel başa şimşir tarak yakışır mı hiç. You astonish me, daughter... You don't even have shoes to wear and you go and buy yourself silk stockings. In your circumstances, isn't that kind of expenditure completely inappropriate. kendi halinde as self · quiet and inoffensive, innocuous (person) · simpleminded Kendi halinde biridir başına vur, lokmasını ağzından al. He's [quite] simple-minded, anyone can take advantage of him. 155 kendimi bildim bileli from even I for as long as knew myI've known self myself kendini tutmak to hold one- to maintain self one's self control See example sentence at yerle bir etmek. kesenin ağzını açmak to open the mouth of the bath glove Turistik oteller kesenin ağzını açtı Touristic hotels begin to spend money more freely (for staff, advertising, etc. -- as vacation bookings skyrocket). kılını (bile) kıpırdatmamak (oynatmamak) not to move not to show (even) a any interest (in hair sb/sth), to appear completely unmoved (by sb/sth), not to bat an eyelash 5 ay içerisinde kullanılması lazım. Deprem konusunda kılını kıpırdatmayan hükümet, Japonların gönderdiği krediye henüz el sürmedi. It [the Japanese credit] must be used within the next 5 months. The [Turkish] government (which has shown no interest in the earthquake subject) still hasn't touched the credit that was sent by the Japanese. kırıta kırıta yürümek to walk co- same meaning quettishly, flirtatiously Genç kız, güzelliğini beğendiği için, arkadaşının önünde kırıta kırıta yürümeye başladı. The young girl, to get approval of her beauty, started strutting around flirtatiously in front of her friend. Note all the following idioms have a similar meaning... kurum satarak yürümek, kasılarak yürümek, caka to begin to spend money more freely 156 satarak azametle yürümek, hoplayıp zıplamak. kırılan cevizler bini geçti the broken walnuts are past a thousand · for sb to go too far · for sb's faults to be past endurance Kırılan cevizler bini geçti, artık onu affetmem. She's gone too far, I won't forgive her anymore. kırk dereden su getirmek to bring water from forty brooks to make all sorts of excuses Kırk dereden su getirdi, işin içinden sıyrıldı. He made all sorts of excuses and managed to escape from a difficult situation. kıyamet kopmak for doomsday to break off · for all hell to break loose · for the end of the world to come İsveç usulü Big Brother evinin her yerinde kamera var. İzleyiciler yarışmacıları banyo yaparken bile izliyor. Bu görüntüler bizde yayınlansa kıyamet kopar. In the Swedish-style 'Big Brother' ('reality' TV program) there are cameras everywhere in the house. Viewers even watch while the contestants bathe. If these images were broadcast to us [in Turkey], all hell would break loose. kol gezmek to wander the arm · (for a guard) to patrol the area · (for a thief) to prowl around and check out the area Bunlar şehir subaşısının adamları dizdarlardı. Kol geziyorlardı. These men were from the police superintendent they were constables. They were patrolling the area. Also see bin dereden su getirmek. 157 kol kanat olmak/germek arm wing to take sb under protective care, under one's 'wing' Sağ olun, kötü günde kol kanat oldunuz bana. Thanks, you took me under your wing during my bad times. Kolay gelsin... Let it come easily... · Take it easy, m'friend... · Let [what you're working on] come easily [for you]. This is a very friendly and polite expression. [Said to any person who is working (or about to start working) as you approach to talk to him/her, or as you pass within hearing distance of him/her -- for any kind of work project (mental or physical), in any walk of life (from President to pauper).] This phrase is used on its own -- and, if you listen carefully, you'll hear it used very often in Turkey. kolları sıvamak to plaster the arms · to get ready to do sth · to roll up one's sleeves Nişanlısı Ben Affleck ile 14 Eylül'de dünyaevine girmeye hazırlanan Jennifer Lopez, düğünün ayrıntılarını basına sızdıran 'Köstebeği' bulmak için kolları sıvadı. Jennifer Lopez Also see paçaları sıvamak. 158 (who has been preparing to marry her fiancé Ben Affleck on 14 September) has [now] rolled up her sleeves in order to find 'the mole' who leaked her wedding details to the news media. komik duruma düşmek to fall to a comic condition to be laughed at, ridiculed Köyün en zeki adamları iddiayı kaybedip komik duruma düştüler. The smartest guys in the village have lost the bet and been ridiculed. kozunu paylaşmak to share a chance to (forcibly) settle accounts with (sb) · Onunla kozunu paylaşmak istiyordu. She was wanting to settle accounts with him... · Gün gelecek, kozumuzu palaşacağız. The day will come, and we'll settle our accounts (then). · Kozumuzu paylaşacağımız günü iple çekiyorum, görsün bakalım. I'm anxiously awaiting our settlement day, just wait and see. kör kütük blind treetrunk [blind, stinking] drunk Kör kütük sarhoş yaşlı adamla çocuklar alay ettiler. The kids teased the old drunk man. kör topal blind lame · after a fashion · in a halfassed way İşlerimiz fena değil kör topal yürütüyoruz. Our business is not bad we're carrying on in a halfassed way. · I've been May be used as shown. Körün istediği bir It was one 159 eye that the blind person wanted, but God gave him/her two eyes. (he/she has been) blessed with more than was expected. · This is much more than I/he/she could have hoped for. köşe bucak corner corner (in) every nook Çok sevdiğim kalemimi and cranny köşe bucak aradımsa da bulamadım. Even if I searched in every nook and cranny for my favorite pen, I [still] couldn't find it. kulak asmamak not to hang ear (to do ear behind) · to turn a deaf ear · to ignore kulis yapmak to do backstage to lobby, work behind the scenes kurban olmak to become a · to be a victim sacrifice (of) · to sacrifice oneself for, give one's life for göz, Allah verdi iki göz. Serves as both an idiom and a proverb. Also seen as kulak ardı etmek. Example sentence at arapsaçına dönmek. Yeni albümünde yer vereceği şarkıları, bilgisayara kaydeden Mahsun Kırmızıgül, virüs kurbanı oldu. Şimdi her şeyi silbaştan yapacak. Albümü piyasaya dört ay daha geç çıkacak. [Turkish singer/actor/heart-throb] Mahsun Kırmızıgül (who says he saved the songs that were to be included on his new album, to his computer) was a victim of a [computer] virus. Now he has to redo everything 160 from scratch. The album's publication will be delayed 4 months. kusura bakmak to look at faults · [Often used as a stylish way of saying] I'm sorry.] · to pardon an impoliteness, to overlook sth unpleasant, to not take offense, to 'let it pass' · Kusura bakma. I'm sorry. (Please overlook what I've said or done.) [Please don't look at my faults.] · Bırak hanım o çocuktur kusura bakmam ben. Stop lady, he's just a child. I don't take offense (at what he's doing). kuyruk acısı (olmak) tail pain (to have) desire · Kuyruk acısı var onfor revenge (to dan böyle davranıyor. feel) rancor He's feeling rancorous that's why he's acting like that. · Köylü yılana, sende kuyruk acısı, bende evlat acısı varken biz dost olamayız demiş. The villager said to the snake, As long as you still feel rancor (for your lost tail), and I still suffer grief for my (dead) child, we can not be friends. külahları değişmek/değiştirmek to change to have a falconical hats ling out with sb to quarrel with each other Uslu durmazsan külahları değişiriz sonra. If you don't sit still, we're going to have a quarrel. külhan beyi or külhanbeyi Mister a tough guy Boiler-in-a- hoodlum Turkishbath Eskiden külhan beyleri de bir teşkilata bağlı imiş, fakat şimdi külhanbeyleri de bitti, teşkilatları da. At one 161 time [individual] hoodlums were affiliated in [loose] organizations, but now that the hoodlums are gone, so are the organizations. küpünü doldurmak to fill the earthenware jar to feather Siz de oğlunuzu, kızınızı one's own nest evlendirin küpünüzü doldurun kardeşim... Saksıyı çalıştırın biraz. You too can feather your own nests when you marry-off your sons and daughters, m'friends... You just have to use your noggins a little. color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter L The Turkish The Literal The 'Plain' English Mean- English ing Meaning Comments and Examples laf ağzında kalmak for a remark to remain in one's mouth to not get a chance to speak to not be able 'to get a word in edgewise' (for sb) suddenly to go silent Kapıyı açar açmaz konuşmaya başladı karşılık veremedim lafım ağzımda kaldı. She started talking as soon as the door opened I wasn't able to respond. I couldn't 'get a word in edgewise'. laf altında kalmamak for a remark to not remain under to give as good as one gets (in an Charlotte Hanım laf altında kalmaz. Çok hazır cevaptır biraz da 162 argument) to give the 'correct and necessary' response to derogatory remarks (of sb else) öfkeli karşılık verir. Ms. Charlotte gives as good as she gets in an argument. She's always ready with an answer and gives her reply a little angrily. laf anlatmak to explain a word · to try to bring sb around to one's own point of view · to try to make sb understand sth See example sentence at deveye hendek atlatmak. laf etmek to make/do remark · usual meaning is to gossip/ speak about (sb/sth) · But, with preceding suffix le/la it simply means to talk (with), chat with · Kimsenin arkasından laf etmeyiz. We don't gossip behind anyone's back. · Ahmet Zeki Efendi'nin çalışkanlığına bile laf etmeye başlamışlardı. Reportedly, they've even started to speak about Ahmet Zeki Efendi's industriousness. · See example sentence at ipe sapa gelmez. laf/söz düşmemek for remark not to fall · for there to be no need for sb to talk · for it not to be sb's turn to speak · (for a child) to not have the right to · Büyükler varken küçüklere laf düşmez. When the adults arrive the children will [thereafter] remain quiet. · Siz varken söz bize düşmez. When you arrive, we'll shut up (in deference to your greater knowldge on the subject). 163 speak in the presence of adults · (for a novice) to not have the right to speak in the presence of an expert · Also see example sentence at hariçten gazel okumak/atmak. lafını etmek See söz etmek. lafla peynir gemisi yürümez The cheese boat won't run on talk. Mere talk won't get anything done. Kaptan, Navlun parasını peşin vermeden, şuradan şuraya gidemeyiz, çünkü peynir gemisi lafla yürümez, demiş. The boat captain said, Without paying the shipment cost in advance, we'll not move from here (from there to there), because (my) cheese boat doesn't run on mere talk. leb (lep) demeden leblebiyi anlamak to understand 'chickpeas' without saying 'chick' to anticipate correctly what sb is going to say to get the idea without hearing all the details to understand where sb is 'coming from' after hearing only a few words to be able to read sb's Ben leb demeden leblebiyi anlarım, açıklamana gerek yok… I get the idea you don't have to explain [every detail]... 164 thoughts leyleği havada görmek to see a stork in to always be the air on the move, to travel a lot, to make frequent trips leyla...mecnun Majnun...Leili (Leyla, Layla, or mecnun...leyla Leyli, Leila) or Leili (Leyla, Layla, Leyli, Leila)...Majnun lokma(sı) ağzında büyümek for a morsel of food to grow in the mouth lovers who are madly/ crazily in love Bu yıl devamlı seyahate çıkıyorsun. Galiba leyleği havada gördün. You've been traveling continuously this year. You've really been on the move. (Probably you saw a stork in the air.) Biz mecnunuz biz leylayız. We are madly in love. (We are Mecnun, we are Leyla.) The star-crossed lovers of eastern literature were the fair Leila [Layla, Leyli, Leili] and her gentlemanfriend Majnun [Qays] -who swooned 1000 years before Shakespeare penned Romeo and Juliet. In Turkish, they are 'mecnun' and 'leyla', shown in lower case because their names have become part of the Turkish vernacular. And when they appear together, it denotes a love that verges on madness. not to have any appetite at all to not be able to swallow food easily because of sadness, fatigue, illness, or poor appetite Dün akşam yemekte o kadar yorgundum ki lokmalar ağzımda büyüdü. Last night at dinner I was so tired that I couldn't eat anything at all. 165 lokur lokur Use this idiomatic phrase to express the sound of boiling water... ... ... Note Except in this phrase, the 'word' lokur is meaningless. color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter M The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning maganda coll. a lout, boor same meaning Havaya ateş eden düğün magandalarının günahsız insanların ölümüne neden olmaması için Kırkareli Emniyet Müdürlüğü bünyesinde 'Düğün Polisi' adlı yeni bir birim kuruldu. A new [police] unit (named the 'Wedding Police') has been established within the Kırkareli-city Police Force -- for the purpose of stopping the killing of innocent people by wedding louts (...for the purpose of wedding louts not being the reason for the deaths of innocent peop-le) who fire [gun-shots] into the air [during wedding 'celebrations']. mahal to not give Herhangi bir kazaya · not to give Comments and Examples 166 vermemek (bırakmamak) (leave) a place/spot rise to, not to occasion · to avoid · not to allow/permit mahal vermemek için avcı müşteriler koruma giysileri ve maskeler takmak zorunda. Oysa kızlar anadan doğma... In order to avoid any kind of accident, the huntercustomers have to wear protective clothing and masks. But the women are completely naked. mecnun...leyla See leyla...mecnun. meramını anlatmak to explain the goal · to express what one wants to · to express oneself · to get by (in a language) Gerekirse İtalyanca ve Arapça ile de meramlarını anlatabiliyorlardı. And when necessary, they could get by in Italian and Arabic. mercimeği fırına vermek This idiom is mildly off-color. to give the lentil · (for two to the oven people not married to each other) to