medet umuyor artık on yıldır görüşmediği ortaokul arkadaşlarını bile arıyor. He's been unemployed for two years. He'll now accept help from absolutely anyone in order to find a job he's even calling friends from junior high school that he hasn't seen in ten years. · after waiting patiently for sth (good) to happen, to finally get tired of (fed up with, depressed from) waiting, and to give up hope that it will happen · to hope in vain · Aylardır yardımını bekliyoruz, uma uma döndük muma. We've been waiting for months for help it's been such a long time that we've lost hope. · Yeter beklediğimiz, uma uma döndük muma. We've waited long enough, the thing we wanted will never happen. · Beş yıldan beri, Ankara'ya tayinimi bekliyorum, uma uma döndük muma. I've been expecting my appointment to (the) Ankara (Headquarters) for five years it's been too long a wait I give up. 217 [-dan/-den] umudu(nu) kesmek to cut the hope from · to give up hope, abandon hope · to cease to hope that (sb will do sth or that sth will happen) Bakanlar vatandaşı ciddiye almıyor. Vatandaş Meclis'ten de umudu kesti. The [Government] Ministers are not taking the citizens seriously. And, the citizens have abandoned hope in the Turkish Parliament. umurumda değil (it's) not in my affair · (I) don't care · it's not important to (me) · Biz onun gibi olamayız. Onun dünyası umurumuzda değil. We aren't like him. We don't care about his 'world'. · Yarın matematik sınavı var, Richard'ın umurunda değil. Tomorrow there's a math exam, Richard is unconcerned. ununu elemiş, eleğini asmış he/she sifted flour, he/she hung up the sifter · He/she has done about all the useful work that he/she will ever do. · He's finished his duties, from now on he won't do anything more. · Artık ben unumu eleyip eleğimi astım, kendimi emekliye ayırdım. Şirketi kızım yönetiyor. I've done all the useful work that I can do, so I've retired. My daughter is running the company now. · Henry Dayı çok yaşlandı, ununu eleyip eleğini astı. Uncle Henry has gotten very old, he done about all the useful work that he can do. Unut, gitsin. Forget, let go. Never mind, just forget it. (An irritated response to sb else's failure to do Benzin almadın mı.. Unut, gitsin. You forgot to get gas [petrol].. Never mind. Forget about it. 218 sth.) uslu durmak (oturmak) to stop (sit) wellbehaved uyku gözünden akmak (for) sleep to to be very flow from sleepy, to be the eyes unable to keep one's eyes open uykusu/uykuları for sleep to escape kaçmak to sit still, be quiet See example sentence at külahları değişmek. Çocuğa baktım, gözlerinden uyku akıyor, Haydi yatağa. dedim. I looked at the child, he could barely keep his eyes open he was so sleepy, Come on, off to bed with you. I said. · to be wor- See example sentence at ried, lose foyası meydana çıkmak. sleep (because of worry) · to be unable to get to sleep color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter Ü The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' Eng- Comments and Examples lish Meaning üç aşağı beş yukarı (also, beş aşağı beş yukarı) three down five up (five down five up) about, a small difference, after some bargaining, approximately üç beş three five a few, a rather small number or portion üçe beşe bakmamak (not to look) to not to be fussy in a bargain 219 three to five üçer beşer three at a time five at a time in small groups small in number, in small portion Üsküdar'da sabah oldu. It became morning in Üsküdar (a suburb of İstanbul). · to be late for a May be used as shown. job · to be late in understanding the meaning of sth · to miss the right time for doing sth due to carelessness üslup (yönünden) (from the direction of) style (with regard to) style Polonyalının cevabı işe şu 'Bizim üslubumuz farklı. Durum tespiti yapıyoruz. Yakında sokağa çıkarız.' In the city of Hille [Iraq], the American soldiers say, come out and tour around, there's nothing to be afraid of. The Polish [troops] answer is this 'Our style is different. We're determining the nature of the situation. We'll come out in the street soon.' üstü başı dökülmek to be for one's clothes poured out to be in tatters (at the) top of the head Cimriliği bırak da kendine yeni bir giysi al artık. Üstün başın dökülüyor. Stop being so stingy and buy yourself some new clothes finally. Your clothes are in tatters. 220 üstü kapalı konuşmak to speak closed (at the) top to speak indirectly/guardedly making it necessary for the listener to 'read between the lines' Susan hanım toplantıda üstü kapalı konuştu ama biz bu konuşma sonucunda işten pek çok kişinin çıkarılacağını anladık. Ms. Susan spoke indirectly at the meeting but we understood that a lot of people would be let go (made redundant from the job) as a result of her speech. üstüne bir bardak (soğuk) su içmek to drink a (cold) glass of water on it to give up all hope of getting sth (that one has lent) back to 'kiss it goodbye' Sen Thomas'a borç mu verdin. Artık o paranın üstüne bir bardak su içebilirsin, çünkü kesinlikle geri ödemez. Did you lend Thomas (some money). Well then, you can kiss that money good-bye, because he definitely won't pay it back. üstüne güneş doğmamak for the sun to get up before not to rise sunrise on he/she/it Babam üstüne güneş doğmadan kalkar, saat 7'de beni uyandırır. My father gets up before dawn, he wakes me at seven (in the morning). üstüne gül koklamamak to not smell a rose on him/her/it to love no one else but (one's beloved spouse/ partner) to have nothing to do with anyone else but (one's beloved spouse) Benim eşim mükemmeldir, onun üstüne gül koklamam. My spouse is just perfect (for me), I love no one else but him/her. üstüne (üzerine) titremek to tremble on top of it to treat with tender loving care to watch over anxiously, to care for meticulously Tek bir çocuğu olmuştu, o da sağlıklı değildi babası, annesi hasta çocuğun üstüne titriyor, ne isterse onu hemen yapıyorlardı. 221 She was the only child, and she wasn't healthy her parents watched over the sick child with loving care, they immediately did whatever she wanted. üstüne tüy dikmek to sew a feather on See üstüne tuz biber ekmek. üstüne (üzerine) tuz biber ekmek to add salt to make a bad and pepsituation worse, per on it to add 'salt to the wound' Benim acım bana yetiyor, bir de sen tuz biber ekme. I'm suffering enough, so don't you add salt to the wound. üstüne yıkmak to demolish on top İki yalancı tanık bulmuş, suçu o zavallının üstüne yıkmışlar. They found two lying witnesses, and dumped the blame on that poor unfortunate woman. to impute (a misdeed or crime) to (sb), to dump (a hard job/the blame) on (sb) color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter V The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning Comments and Examples vadesi gelmek (for) the due date to come to die Ralph bey otuz beş seneden sonra nihayet emekli olmuş. Bir ay sonra vadesi gelmişti. Mr. Ralph finally retired after thirtyfive years. And then one month later, he died. vakit öldürmek to kill time to kill time, to waste time Milyonlarca insan kıraathanede vakit öldürüyor. Millions of (Turkish) people kill/waste Also see zaman öl- 222 dürmek. time in Turkish coffeehouses. · vermeyince Mabut, neylesin Mahmut · vermeyince Mabut, ne yapsın Mahmut If God can't give, what can Mahmut do. This phrase is used when referring to sb who is so A more figura- unlucky that tive translation even when others try to help If even God can't help this him/her, they can't succeed. poor person out, then how do you expect 'me' [generically named Mahmut] to help him/her. Harry bey, katıldığı yarışmada ödül olarak bir hafta tatil kazandı ama hastalanınca gidemedi. Vermeyince Mabut, neylesin Mahmut. Mr. Harry won a one-week vacation as the award for the competition he entered, but when he became ill he couldn't go. He's so unlucky. vız gelmek for a buzz to come Aslan, vız gelir sana Milan. The Galatasaray football team (Aslan) has no need to be worried about [their next opponent] Milan. Vur dedikse öldür demedik ya. If we said hit, · I didn't mean we didn't mean that you should kill, ya' know. go that far, ya' know. · I didn't mean that you should 'go overboard'. · I didn't mean that you should overdo it. Bügün 'zayıflama rejimini bozabilirsin' dedik ama vur deyince öldür demedik ya. Amma çok yemişsin. I/We said you could break your slimming diet today, but I/we didn't mean you should go overboard, ya' know. Yet, look how much you've eaten. vur patlısın, çal oynasın hit, let explode to enjoy (oneplay, let dance self) wildly, to the hilt, by 'whooping it up', by 'paint- · Onlara hayat vur patlasın çal oynasın. Eğlencede sınır tanımıyorlar. To them life is for enjoying to the hilt. Where (to sb) not to matter a whit, not to be of the slightest importance 223 ing the town red', by 'living it up' · vurdumduymaz Kör Ayvaz... · vurdumduymaz kör Ayvaz… · vurdumduymaz Körayvaz… I hit him/her but he/she didn't feel it, Blind Ayvaz... This phrase is used to refer to an unfeeling/insensitive person who A more figura- doesn't care tive translation about anyone or anything. I hit him/her but he/she couldn't feel it, the insensitive ass. fun is concerned, they know no limit. · Bu tazminat bir elime geçsin... Ondan sonra, vur patlasın çal oynasın. Just let me get my hands on this retirement bonus …After that, I'm going to live it up. Vurdumduymaz Kör Ayvaz'dır. Annesinin hastalığını bile umursamıyor. She is completely insensitive. Even though her mother is ill, she doesn't give a damn. [...doesn't care.] color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter Y The Turkish The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' English Meaning Comments and Examples ya bu deveyi gütmeli ya bu diyardan gitmeli you must herd these camels or you must leave this land · take it or leave it · either accept the situation the way it is and start working on it, or gather up Bir dersten bile kalırsan üniversiteden atılırsın. Ya bu deveyi gütmeli ya bu diyardan gitmeli. If you fail even one class, you'll be thrown out of the university. So...you'd better straighten up and fly 224 your belong- right. ings and leave · you'd better straighten up and fly right yabana atmak to throw to the wild · to disregard · to attach no importance to · to brush aside, shrug off See example sentence at foyası meydana çıkmak. yaka paça collar trotter by force, forcibly Hukuk öğrencisi Mehtap Yurtluk, 'Biz size güvenmiyoruz. Sadaka değil hakkımızı istiyoruz' dedikten sonra polislerce yaka paça tuvalete götürüldü ve Başbakan Erdoğan toplantıdan ayrılıncaya kadar orada tutuldu. After law student Mehtap Yurtluk declared, 'We don't trust you. We don't want handouts, we want our rights,' several policemen took her forcibly to the toilet and held her there until Prime Minister Erdoğan left the meeting. yalan yanlış lie mistake very inaccurate full of mistakes, 225 even fabrications Yalancının mumu yatsıya kadar yanar. Serves as both an idiom and a proverb. The liar's candle burns until about two hours after sunset. It doesn't May be used as shown. take long for a lie to be exposed. yanı sıra row/line/order · right along to the side with, right along side, together with · besides, in addition to · along with · O avukatının yanı sıra doktoru da geldi. He brought his lawyer along with his doctor. · Kendi özel işlerinin yanı sıra, bizim işlerimizle de ilgilenmeyi unutmadı. Besides his own private business, he didn't forget an interest in ours. yanağından kan damlamak to drip blood from the cheek to be rosy cheeked and healthy, in great health Sağımızdaki, yanağından kan damlayan iri Çerkez'i gördüm. On our right, I saw a large Caucasian/Circassian [person] who was in radiant health. yanına bırakmamak (koymamak) to not leave (put) to the side to not let sb get away with sth without consequences 'Elbet bunu yanınıza koymam.' 'I certainly won't let you get away with this.' yanına varılmaz he/she/it doesn't arrive next to unapproach- Burnu Kaf dağında, able, very çalımından yanına expensive varılmıyor. His nose is on Kaf Mountain, he's unapproachable due to his affected dignity. 226 An unpaid bill [must] come back from Baghdad. When you May be used as shown. find that a mistake has See The Best of the Idbeen made, iom Stories too. you should make every effort to correct it, no matter what the cost. yapma bebek a making baby · a pretty, See example sentence at but cold and yer almak. soulless girl/ woman · a marble statue yapmadığını bırakmamak not to leave not done to do 'everything in the book', to do everything one can to annoy or upset sb else Anthony bize yapmadığını bırakmadı, inanamazsınız neler söyledi neler... Anthony did everything he could to upset us, you won't believe the things, ooh the things, he said... yasağı delmek to pierce prohibition to ignore or flout the rules to deliberately do sth that is prohibited or banned or declared unsuitable Bazıları 'korumasıyla' güneşlendi bazıları ise 'haşema' yasağını deldi... Some take the sun under bodyguard protection...as for others, they flout the ban on 'haşema' (baggy, calf-length swimwear for Muslim men) . yaş tahtaya basmak to step on a damp board to be duped to be swindled Ben yaş tahtaya basmam, iyice araştırmadan bir işe girmem. I'm not [easily] duped. I Yanlış hesap Bağdat'tan döner. Serves as both an idiom and a proverb. Also see 227 don't start anything (job, etc.) before I research it thoroughly. çürük tahtaya basmak. yelken açmak to open sail to hoist sail, to set sail Üzerinde buz dağları dolaşan büyük denizlerde yelken açmıştı. He set sail in heavy seas on which icebergs wandered. yelken kürek sail oar at top speed Bunu uygun gören reisler hemen demir alıp, yelken kürek kaçmaya başladılar. The skippers, in accordance with this fitting ploy, started escaping at top speed. yelkenleri suya indirmek to lower the sails to the water to get down off one's high horse to draw in one's horns Suçu ortaya çıkınca yelkenleri suya indirip özür diledi. When her guilt was revealed she got down off her high horse and apologized. yer acımak [for a place, part] to hurt same meaning Aşığın kestiği yer acımaz. The place where love cuts, doesn't hurt. yer almak to take a place · to be located in, be situated in (a place) · (for sb) to have a part in, be involved in (a project, a job) · to be in, appear in Antalya Yivliminare Medresesi'nde 'Güzel Anadolu' isimli yapma bebek sergisinde Tarkan'ın yapma bebeği de yer aldı. A sculptured-model of Tarkan appeared in the sculptured-modeling show called 'Beautiful Anatolia' at the Antalya Fluted-minaret Theo- 228 logical School. yer vermek to give a space · to allow (sth) to happen · to give (sb) a seat · to include, discuss (sb, sth) (in a book, speech, etc.) · to give coverage in a newspaper · to allow for, give a place to Yerin kulağı var(dır). There is an ear in the place. [Be careful May be used as shown. what you say because] the walls have ears. yerinde yeller esmek for winds to blow instead to have vanished to be gone with the wind Hırsız dolabı boşaltmış, elbiselerimin yerinde yeller esiyor. The thief emptied the closet, all my dresses have disappeared. to come loose, get loose, to move or budge from İri Garip yerinden oynamadı. Big Garip didn't budge from his place. for one sb/sth to take (or usurp) the place of an- See example sentence at başı göğe ermek. yerinden oynamak to play from place yerine geçmek to pass to the place 'nun bu davranışına gazeteler de geniş yer verildi. [the Russianlesbian pop-duo] that infuriated even the Japanese people who are [usually] loving and tolerant. · Also see example sentence at hiçe saymak. 229 other yerine getirmek to bring to a place · to bring (sth) back, restore · to carry out, perform, execute (a task) · Ata'mızın bize bıraktığı görevi, yurdun her karış toprağında yerine getireceğimizden kimsenin kuşkusu olmasın. In keeping with the duty that was left to us by (Turkish Republic founder) Ataturk, let no one doubt that we will restore every 'inch' of the homeland's territory. · Sultan'ın emrini ilk yerine getiren Yakup Ağa oldu. Yakup Ağa was the first to carry out the sultan's order. · Tesettür de giyerim çıplak da çıkarım. Ünlü manken, Tesettür defilelerine çıkmaktan kaçınmam işimin gereklerini yerine getiriyorum dedi. Headline I may dress in the [orthodox-Muslim] all-enveloping style of clothing, and I may also go nude. The famous model [Şenay Akay] said, I won't avoid working in religiousdress fashion shows I perform my job according to the needs. yerle bir etmek to make/do one with place to destroy, to wreck altogether Laik Cumhuriyet ilkelerinin yerle bir edilmesine rağmen çok sayıdaki komutan kendini tutuyor ve 'Ya 230 sabır' çekerek duygularını içine atıyor. Despite [seeing] the Turkish Republic's secular founding principles being destroyed, a lot of military commanders maintain their self control -- and sighing while saying 'Be patient', they keep their worries to themselves. yerli yerinde in local place in the proper place, in the original position Kitaplarım her zaman yerli yerindedir. My books are always in their proper place. yerli yersiz local homeless (doing sth) without stopping to consider whether or not it's appropriate Yerli yersiz konuşmalarıyla gönül kırıyor. She breaks hearts with the inconsiderate things she says -- without considering the consequences. yılan hikayesi a snake story · a messy problem that has no easy solution · a problem that crops up intermittently without ever being resolved Temeli 1996 yılında atılan ve büyük umutlarla inşaatına başlanan hastanenin yapımı yılan hikayesine döndü. The hospital's construction (that was started with such high hopes when the foundation was laid in 1996) has turned into an unresolved mess. yıldırımları (şimşekleri) üstüne/üzerine to pull on a thunderbolt (lightening to attract strong criticism Ahlaksız açıklamalarıyla yıldırımları üzerine çekti, şimdi tüm 231 çekmek flash) halk ona kızgın. She drew heavy criticism for her churlish remarks, now everybody is angry with her. 1. star harmony, star compatibility 2. to reconcile the stars 1. getting along well with others, getting along pleasantly with each other 2. to get along well with others/each other Yedi aylık iktidar boyunca kimseyle yıldızları barışmadı. AKP herkesle kavgalı. Headline For the length of its seven months in power, it hasn't gotten along well with anyone. yok etmek to make/do non-existent to destroy, to wreck altogether · İsrail Hamas'ı tamamen yok edeceğiz. Headline -- Israel says We'll completely destroy [the extremist group] Hamas. · Ülkenin temel taşlarını yıpratmak ve yok etmek istiyorlar. They want to erode and destroy the fundamental foundations of the country. yol açmak to open a road · to cause · to pave the way · to open a road 1. yıldız barışıklığı 2. yıldızları barışmak Bu acı içinde Hızır Reis Tunus'a girerken teknelere sancak açtırmamıştı. Bu da Tunus halkı arasında şüphe ve korkuya yol açmıştı. In this mental anguish, the Skipper Hızır [later known as Barbarossa] didn't raise 232 the ship's flag when he entered [the port of] Tunis. And this caused doubt and fear among the Tunisian people. yol yordam (yol yöntem) road method the right way to do (sth) yollara düşmek to fall to the roads · to set off (on a journey) (for an important reason) · to go out and wander near and far (in search of sb/sth) · to take a show on the road yollu yolunca (place) which · in a proper has a road in way its proper way · 'according to Hoyle' Oruç Reis, sultan'ın yanına varınca peşkeş hediyelerini yollu yolunca verdi. When Skipper Oruç arrived at the side of the sultan, he gave the gifts (which were not his to give) in a way, that appeared proper and aboveboard. yönünden from the direction Bu sözcükler, biçim ve anlam yönünden kalıplaşmışlardır. These words, from the standpoint of meaning and form, are stereotypes. from the standpoint of, with regard to, with respect to Tarkan yollara düşecek. Son albümü 'Dudu' ile büyük beğeni toplayan Tarkan, Türkiye turmesine İzmir'den start verecek. Tarkan will take his show on the road. Tarkan (who has gathered a lot of approval with his latest album, called 'Dudu') will start his tour of Turkey from İzmir. 233 yufka yürekli filo with heart tenderhearted Marjorie yufka yüreklidir sorunları olanı görünce çok üzülür. Marjorie is tenderhearted when she sees someone with a problem, she gets upset. yumurta kapıya dayanamadan an egg from until the last leaning on the minute, door while there's just/still sufficient time Yumurta kapıya dayanamadan bizim Türk insanı harekete geçmez. Turkish people don't get moving until the very last minute. yumurta kapıya dayanmak (gelmek, sıkışmak) for an egg to lean on (come to, be hard pressed to) the door 1. for a given time period to be almost up 2. for a situation to become desparate, for sb to be hard pressed Yumurta kapıya dayanana [dayanıncaya, gelene] kadar bekleme. Don't wait until the last minute (...until you are hard pressed). yürek hoplatmak to cause the heart to jump up (in the air) to cause the heart to flutter with excitement or desire Bir Türk kızı kolay kolay bu bikiniyi giyemez. Ama Amerika'da yaşayan Seher Başak tatil için geldiği Akdeniz'de mini bikinisiyle yürek hoplattı. A [native] Turkish lass wouldn't [be seen to] wear this bikini very easily. But Seher Başak (a Turk who lives in America) made hearts flutter with this mini bikini when she came for 234 her Mediterranean vacation. for the heart to ache · be sorry (for sb) · be moved (by a pathetic sight) · be heartbreaking See example sentence at ileri sürmek. yüz üstü bırakmak to leave face upper to leave in the lurch, to leave things in an incomplete condition Tanrının sana emaneti olan halkı yüz üstü bıraktın. You left the people that God entrusted to you, in the lurch. · yüz vermek · yüz vermemek · to give face · to not give face · to indulge, to be indulgent to, to spoil · not to indulge, not to be indulgent, not to spoil · Çocuklara yüz vermek, onları şımartmaktır. To indulge children is to spoil them. · … Kadınlarsa yüz verdikçe başımıza çıkıyor. …If [we are on the subject of] women, the more [we] indulge [them] the more they are taking [us] over... · Arsıza yüz verince astar da ister. Proverb When you give him/her an inch, she/he'll take a mile. [Lit. When you indulge a shameless man (with some cloth, he'll also want the lining.] Yüzünüz yabancı gelmedi. Your face doesn't come foreign. You look familiar. May be used as shown. yürek sızlamak (yüreği sızlamak) 235 color bar Turkish Idioms beginning with the letter Z The Turkish zam gelmek (yapmak) The Literal English Meaning The 'Plain' Comments and English Mean- Examples ing (for a) price in· for a price Ekmeğe zam geldi. crease to occur (be increase to oc- There's been an increase made) cur (be made)... in the price of bread. · for a salary increase to be earned (given) zaman bırakmak to leave time to set time aside (for sb/sth) Konuşmaya zaman bıraksaydın seni suçlamadığımı görürdün. If you'd given me time to speak, you'd have seen that I didn't accuse you. zaman kazanmak to earn time to save time, to Kısa yoldan giderek gain time zaman kazanabiliriz. We can save time by going the shorter way. zaman kollamak to watch out for time to be on the lookout for a suitable opportunity, to bide one's time. Zaman kollayıp uygun ortamın doğmasını bekleyeceksin. You should bide your time and wait for a better opportunity. zaman öldürmek to kill time to spend time on inconsequential things · Seni bilmem ama benim zaman öldürecek durumum yok. I don't know about you, but I'm in no position to just kill time. · Benimkisi zaman Also see vakit öldürmek. 236 öldürmek, iş değil. This isn't work, I'm killing time. (birisine) zaman vermek to give time to set time aside for sb (for some purpose). · Eğer zaman verirseniz başaracaktır. He'll succeed if you'll give him time. · Sana burayı terketmen için bir dakikalık zaman veriyorum. I'm giving you one minute's time to get outta here. zaman zaman time time from time to · Ünlü İnternet sitesi time, occasion- DeansPlanet zaman ally zaman düzenlediği ilginç anketler ve yayınladığı fotoğraflarla ilgi çekiyor. Famous Internet website DeansPlanet attracts attention with the photos that it publishes and the interesting polls that it arranges from time to time. · Bize gelir zaman zaman, eski günleri anarız. He visits us now and then, we remind him of the old days. zamana uymak to fit to time to conform to the age one lives in, keep in step with the times Eskiler Zaman sana uymazsa sen zamana uy, demişler. The old ones say If the times don't fit you, fit the times. zamanı geçmek to pass time to be out of date, (for sth) to expire, be- Bu ilacı kullanmamalısın. Zamanı geçmiş. You mustn't use this 237 come void (due medicine. It has expired. to time pas(The expiry date has sage), (for a passed.) fruit of vegetable) to no longer be in season. zamanlı zamansız with time without time (doing sth) without considering whether it's suitable Zamanlı zamansız bana uğrar. He drops in to see me, any old time he feels like it. zan altında bulmak/ bırakmak to find/be left under supposition to be under suspicion · Televizyonda adımı o hırsızın adıyla birlikte andınız ve beni zan altında bıraktınız. You mentioned my name together with that thief's name and you left me under suspicion. · Sözlerinizden dolayı zan altındayım. I am under suspicion because of what (the things) you said. zangır zangır (titremek) (shaking) with a rattle, shaking/trembling same meaning Zavallı kız. Kocaman köpeği aniden bahçede gördü ve şimdi korkudan zangır zangır titriyor. Poor girl. She saw the huge dog in the garden suddenly and she is trembling violently with fear now. zar atmak to throw membrane, to throw a die to gamble zar zor unwillingly, reluc- same tantly, with Otobüse zar zor yetiştik. We made the 238 difficulty, forcibly, at the last minute bus (departure) with difficulty (at the last minute). zarar etmek to do damage · to lose money · make a wrong move · to damage, injure, harm Şirket zarar ediyor. The company is losing money. zarar gelmek (for) damage to come (for sb) to suffer at the hands of, to be wronged by, to be treated unjustly Ayşe iyi kızdır. Ondan zarar gelmez. Ayşe's a nice girl. She's not out to get anyone. (Damage will not come from Ayşe.) zarar görmek to see damage to be damaged/ injured/ harmed by (sth or sb), to suffer loss Ev depremden zarar gördü. The house was damaged by the earthquake. zarar vermek to give damage to damage, injure, harm Fırtına bahçedeki ağaçlara zarar verdi. The storm damaged the trees in the garden. zarara sokmak to cause (sb or place of business) to suffer loss/damage same meaning Oğlum arabamla kaza yaptı ve beni pek çok zarara soktu. My son had an accident with my car and cost me a 'bundle'. to harm, be harmful to, have a harmful effect on Bize yardım etmek için gelmişti ama, maalesef, çok zararı dokundu. He had come here to help us but, unfortunately, he harmed us a lot. zararı dokunmak to be touched by harm/damage Zararı yok. There is no dam- · It doesn't mat- Ayşe Ay. Çok özür 239 age. ter. · Never mind. · That's OK. Forget it. zararına satmak to sell to damage to sell (sth) at a İş değişikliği nedeniyle loss bütün malları zararına sattılar. Because of the change in business, they sold all the goods at a loss. zararlı çıkmak to go out with damage to come out a loser Benimle uğraşmayı bırak. Yoksa zararlı çıkacaksın. Stop picking on me. Or else you'll be sorry. (Or else you'll come out a loser.) zart zurt etmek to make bluster to bluster Bırak bu zart zurt etmeyi, biz senin kim olduğunu bilmiyor muyuz. Leave off with that blustering, don't you think we know who you are. zarta atmak to throw fart, poop · to praise yourself in an exaggerated manner · to speak haughtily · to fart, poop, break wind Durmadan orda burda zarta atar durur ama korkağın biridir. He shows off continuously around these parts, but (in fact) he's a coward. to pull fart/poop Bela biriydi ama This is an offcolor idiom. zartayı çekmek · to fart, poop, dilerim. Dondurmayı kağıdın üstüne düşürdüm. Ali Zararı yok. Başka bir kâğıt kullanırım. Ayşe Oh. I am very sorry. I've dropped the ice-cream on your paper. Ali Never mind. I'll use another piece (of paper). 240 This is an offcolor idiom. break wind sonunda zartayı çekti. · coll. -- to die, He was an evil one but kick the bucket he finally 'kicked the bucket'. person works matters pertaining to personnel zatı eşya person things personal effects Zatı eşyanı bekleme odasında bırakma. Don't leave your personal effects in the waiting room. zayıf almak to take weak for a student to get a failing grade Sınavdan önce daha sıkı çalışsaydın zayıf almazdın. You wouldn't have gotten such a lousy grade if you had studied harder before the exam. zayıf düşmek to fall weak to lose weight, get thin to get weak Zavallı çocuk. Hastalıktan zayıf düştü. Poor child. He's been left weak by the disease. zayıf nahif weak gaunt frail and thin Kapıyı açınca karşımda zayıf nahif bir çocuk gördüm. When I opened the door, I saw a child, frail and thin, in front of me. zehabına kapılmak to be snatched to to get the misthe mistaken belief taken impression (that) Fadime'nin Ercan'ı sevdiği zehabına kapıldı. He got the mistaken idea that Fadime loved Ercan. zehir gibi like poison · Üff. Bu biber zehir gibi. Onu nasıl yiyebiliyorsun.... Uggh. This zat işleri Also seen as özlük işleri. · very hot (spicy) · very bitter 241 · sharp, biting · very clever · extremely 'cool' or 'hip' pepper is like poison (too spicy hot). How can you eat it.... · Maşallah, zehir gibi çocuk. Eminim çok başarılı olacak. May God preserve him from evil, he is a very clever child. I am sure he will be very successful. zehir zemberek (also zehir zakkum, zehir zıkkım) poison mainspring · very hurtful (words) · deep and rueful (sigh) · very bitter (tears) O akşam geç kalmıştı, babası öfkelenmiş, zehir zemberek sözler söylemişti ona. That evening he came home late, his father was angry and said some very hurtful words to him. Zehir zıkkım olsun. Let it be poison poison [sic]. May he/she/it/you choke to death on it. Beni bırakıp gitti. Onun için yaptığım kekler zehir zıkkım olsun. He left me and went away. May he choke to death on the cakes I made for him. zembereği boşalmak for the mainspring to be emptied to be seized by Beni çamurun içinde a fit of laughter görünce zembereği boşaldı. When he saw me in the mud, he was seized by a fit of laughter. zerre kadar until an atom the least little bit, the slightest degree Benim ona zerre kadar güvenim yoktur, babasını bile aldatır. I don't trust her the least little bit, she even cheats her father. zeval vermek to give decline to harm, destroy Allah devlete zeval vermesin. May god not 242 allow the state to be destroyed. zevale yüz tutmak for the face to hold to begin to deto the decline cline İmparatorluğun zevale yüz tuttuğu açıkça görülüyordu. It was obvious (clearly seen) that the empire had begun to decline. zevkine bakmak (also, keyfine bakmak) to look at pleasure to enjoy oneself Bütün o problemleri unut da zevkine bak. Forget your troubles and just be happy. (Forget about all those problems and enjoy yourself.) zevkine gitmek to go to pleasure to give sb pleasure Gömlek hoşuma gitti. Onu satın alacağım. I like the shirt. I'll buy it. zevkine varmak to arrive to pleasure to discover pleasure (in a piece of music or art or other thing), to start to feel enjoyment (in sth) Bu parçayı dinledikçe daha çok zevkine varıyordu şimdi... Now, each time he listens to the piece, he derives more pleasure [from it]. zevkini bozmak to break pleasure to spoil (sb's) pleasure or fun Defol git. Zevkimizi bozma. Get out. and don't spoil our fun. to enjoy (sth) to the hilt Sabahları erkenden kalkıyor, çevrede dolaşmaya çıkıyordu. Doğadaki dinginliğin, canlılığın zevkini çıkarıyordu bir başına. He would get up early in the morning and go out in the environment and Note hoşuna gitmek is used more frequently. zevkini çıkarmak to extract pleasure 243 wander about. And by himself, he'd get tremendous pleasure from the vigor and the passivity of nature. zevkini okşamak to caress pleasure zevkten dört köşe to have/be four corners from enolmak joyment to give sb pleasure Bu müzik her zaman zevkimi okşamıştır. This music has always given me pleasure. to jump for joy, Babası, ağabeyisine be overjoyed, kızdıkça evin küçüğü be very happy zevkten dört köşe oluyordu. The little one of the house was overjoyed each time his father got angry with his older brother. zeytinyağı gibi [üste] (suyun yüzüne) çıkmak to come out [in addition] like olive oil, to emerge (to the water's face) like olive oil (for a guilty person) to outwit accusers and come out smelling like a rose Her seferinde aynı şey, suçu kendi işler, kolayca kardeşinin üstüne yıkıp zeytinyağı gibi üste çıkardı. It's the same thing every time, he's the guilty one, but he dumps it on his brother and comes out smelling like a rose. zıddına basmak to press opposite to do exactly the opposite of what others want you do Note zıddına basmak is not used as much as zıt gitmek, which has the same meaning. zıddına gitmek to go opposite (for sth) to be too much (for sb) to take See zıt gitmek. zınk diye (stopping) with a same meaning Zınk diye durdu. He See zıt gitmek. 244 sudden, noisy jolt with a jolt stopped with a sudden jolt. all of a sudden same meaning Adam zıp diye karşıma çıktı. All of a sudden, the guy appeared in front of me. Also seen as zırzır. a sound that continues in an incessant, nerveracking way · in an extreme way extremely · in an incessant, nerveracking way Bu padişah oğlu zır deli, hatta zır zır deli. This sultan's son is quite mad, even more... he's extremely crazy. zırıl zırıl ağlamak to cry incessantly and unpleasantly · to weep a flood of tears · to cry like a baby · Bütün gün zır zır ağlamaktan başka bir şey yapmadın. Besides incessantly weeping all day, you haven't done anything. · Zır zır ağlamayı bırak da git bir sonraki sınava daha iyi çalış. Stop crying like a baby and prepare yourself better for the next exam. zıp diye Similar to pat/şıp diye . zır zır Also seen as zır zır ağlamak zırıl zırıl terlemek to sweat 'zırıl zırıl' to sweat buckets Hava o kadar sıcak ki millet zırıl zırıl terliyor. The weather is so hot that people are sweating buckets. zırnık (bile) vermemek to not (even) give arsenic Siz onun söylediklerine kanmayın, o ne bana, ne de öteki yeğenine zırnık bile vermez sözünü eder sadece. Don't be fooled by what he says, he doesn't give even the slightest little thing to me or his other to not give (even) the smallest valueless thing (to sb) 245 nephew he just talks. Zırva tevil götürmez. It doesn't take nonsense, willful misunderstanding/ interpret-ation. It's no use trying to make sense out of a statement that is nonsense. May be used as shown. zıt gitmek to go opposite to persist in doing the opposite of what others want you to do Müdürle sürekli zıt gidersen kovulursun. If you always disagree with the director, you'll be fired. zıvanadan çıkmak to go out of a short (for sb) to blow tube (called a his stack, get in 'zıvana') a towering rage, to go insane Bu kez de başarısız olursam, babam zıvanadan çıkar, bana yapmadığını bırakmaz. And if I don't succeed this time, my father will blow his top, he'll do everything in the book to me. ziftlenmek to be caulked, to be pitched to stuff one's face with food (said scornfully) 'Ziftlenmek', yemek yemek anlamında, olumsuz yönde küfür yerine kullanılan argo bir deyimdir. 'Ziftlenmek' is idiomatic slang that is used instead of a negative off-color term, to denote (excessive) eating. zihni açılmak (for) mental to be opened to feel mentally Geçen yıl böyle değildi, alert bu yıl zihni açıldı, sınıfın en iyi öğrencilerinden biri oldu. He wasn't like that last year, this year he became mentally alert, and he's become one of the best students in the 246 class. zihni bulanmak for mental to become muddy to get confused, get muddled up Hep C vitamininin zararsız olduğunu düşünürdüm ama bilim adamlarının son açıklamaları zihnimi bulandırdı. I always thought vitamin C was harmless but recent statements of scientists have confused me. zihnini kurcalamak to try to pry open the mental (for sth) to keep popping into one's mind to think hard try hard to remember or understand sth · Bu soru nice geceler zihnimi kurcalayıp durmuştu. This problem pops into my head so many nights and stays there. · Zihni kurcalayan sorun, beni bütün gece uykusuz bıraktı. The problem that kept popping into his head, left him sleepless. zil gibi like a bell completely drunk, looped, soused Her gece içip eve zil gibi geliyorsun. You are drinking every night and coming home completely drunk. zil takıp oynamak to connect a bell and play to jump for joy, Haber o kadar güzeldi dance a jig ki zil takıp oynayacaktım neredeyse. The news was so good that I nearly jumped for joy. zilsiz oynamak to play without a bell to jump for joy O kadar neşeli ki zilsiz oynuyor. She is so happy that she is jumping for joy. 247 zilzurna sarhoş blind drunk, plowed, completely drunk same meaning Eve her Cumartesi gecesi zilzurna sarhoş gelirdi. He used to come home blind drunk every Saturday night. zokaya gelmek/zokayı yutmak to swallow bait to fall for a trick, take the bait · Adam zokayı yuttu. Sonu yakındır. The man has fallen for the trick. His end is nigh. · Zokayı yutmayacak kadar akıllıyım. I'm smart enough not to take the bait. zokayı yutturmak to make sb swallow bait to get sb else to Çok uğraştılar ama zofall for a trick, kayı yutturamadılar. take the bait They tried hard but they couldn't make him fall for their scam. zom olmak to be exceedingly drunk same meaning Ben sen gibi değilim. Öyle iki bardak viskiyle zom olmam. I am not like you. I don't get that drunk on just two glasses of whiskey. zonk zonk used to intensify same meaning zonklamak (throb with pain) Burnum zonk zonk zonkluyordu. My nose was throbbing like hell with pain. Zor alırsın/ gidersin/ yaparsın. You're going to have some trouble (doing that). [often said tauntingly] same meaning Sen o parayı benden zor alırsın. It'll be difficult for you to get that money from me. (You are going to take that money from me with difficulty.) zor bela trouble calamity · with great difficulty · just barely Evi boyamayı zor bela bitirip hemen taşındı. He just barely finished 248 painting the house and then moved in immediately. zor gelmek to come trouble (for sth) to be difficult for (sb) Türkçe başlarda size biraz zor gelebilir ama farkına varınca düşündüğünüzden daha zordur. At first, you may find the Turkish language a little difficult -- but then you realize that it's harder than you thought. zor kullanmak to use trouble to use force Gerçeği söyletmek için zor kullanmak insanlıkla bağdaşır mıydı. Does humanity have to use force in order to speak the truth. zor zar See zar zor. zora gelmemek to not come to worry to not be able to stand stress/pressure/ difficulty Tembel herif. Hiç zora gelmezsin. Ancak domuzlar gibi yemeyi bilirsin. You lazy man. You can't stand any difficulty. But you sure know how to eat. (...eat like a pig.) zora koşmak to run to difficulty to make things difficult (for sb) Bizi zora koşmayın da yardımcı olun. Zorun ne. What is your diffi- What's making culty/trouble. you do.... Zorun ne ki beni öyle sorguya çekiyorsun. What's making you give me the third degree like this. 249 zorunda bırakmak to leave in trouble to leave sb no choice but to do sth Kızım beni elli milyon lira ödemek zorunda bıraktı. I had no choice but to pay my daughter the fifty million lira. (My daughter left me no choice...) zorunda (olmak) (to be) in trouble · to have to · a way of saying must Yarın erken kalkmak zorundayım. I must get up early tomorrow. zorunlu koşul obligatory condition sine qua non, an indispensable condition zula etmek to put/hide in a se- same meaning cret place, to give secretly, in an undercover way Sigara paketini bahçede bir yere zula ettim. Babam asla onu orada bulamaz. I secretly hid the packet of cigarettes somewhere in the garden. My father can never find it there. zulaya atmak to throw in a secret place to put/hide in a secret place Korkma. Parayı zulaya attım. Artık kimse bulamaz. Don't worry. I put the money in a secret place. No one can find it now. züğürt (züğür) tesellisi penniless consolation an unimportant trifle that a person pretends is important in order to console himself about a major loss or failure Bakma sen, benim söylediklerim züğürt tesellisi, bunu ben de biliyorum. Don't look at me, the things I said are no more than a selfdeceiving consolation, and I know it... zülfü yâre dokunmak to touch (the) beloved's tress (of · to offend the powers that be Zülfü yâre dokunmak isteyen, sonucuna kat- 250 hair) · step on a bigwig's toes lanmasını da bilmelidir. Anyone who wants to step on a bigwig's toes, must know how to endure the result. wonderful (but imaginary) Söylediğin şey Zümrüdüanka gibi. Onu nasıl bulayım ki. The thing you have mentioned is wonderful, like Simurgh the mythical bird. How can I find it. Our contributor DS adds, This idiom is originally Persian or Arabic. 'Zülf-ü yâr' or 'Zülf-i yâr' meaning 'Hair of the loved (lover/fiancé etc). And if sb were to try to touch the hair of sb else's lover (ie., make a sexual advance), then they'd be in big trouble. Zümrüdüanka gibi like Simurgh (a mythical bird of enormous size) color bar 251 The Best of the Idiom Stories Historical origins of selected Turkish idioms Visit our website soon and often… It's dedicated to struggling Turkish language learners just like you -- and it's loaded with authentic voice recordings too.. The Learning Practical Turkish website is located at http //www.practicalturkish.com/ 252 The Best of the Turkish Idiom Stories -- beginning with the letter A Ağaca çıksa pabucu yerde kalmaz. Literal meaning If he/she goes up in a tree, his shoes don't remain on the ground Idiomatic meaning She/He's crafty, not easily fooled. The story… One day, Nasreddin Hoca went out walking in his pair of brand new shoes. A gang of youthful pranksters saw him and set out to trick him and steal the new shoes. As they approached him on the footpath, they pretended to enter into a deep discussion among themselves -about the Hoca's ability in the 'art' of tree climbing…But the Hoca was suspicious of their behavior and sensed that they meant to trick him. So when the leader of the gang asked the Hoca slyly whether or not the old fellow was still capable of climbing a nearby tree, the Hoca replied, Of course, I am. And, with that, he jumped up on it and began climbing -but not before tucking his new shoes safely in his breast coat. The gang members all shouted out at once, Wait Hoca, leave the shoes down here on the ground. What use will they be in the tree. By now the Hoca understood the gang's intention very well, and with a glint in his eye, replied, Oh, who knows…Perhaps from the tree, I'll have to journey to the next village by yonder road. And so, the idiom has become associated with people who are intelligent and alert in the face of tricky dealings. color bar Altından çapanoğlu çıkmak Literal meaning for Çapanoğlu to pop up Idiomatic meaning for an 'activity' or 'job' to meet with an undesired or unexpected difficulty, problem, or danger The story… For a time, Çapanoğlu Ahmet Pasha and his two sons, Mustafa and Süleyman, ruled like feudal lords over wide territories encompassing the city/towns of Amasya, Yozgat, Ankara, Niğde, and Kaysarı (until 1808 when Sultan Mahmut II had all three executed). But although the Çapanoğlu's were tough rulers during their reign, they 253 also listened carefully to the problems of their people, and, where possible, they tried to ease the lot of the underdog. According to one account, at the time of Çapanoğlu Süleyman Bey, in Yozgat, there lived a pretty widow woman…And, a married man with a large family kept after her for sexual favours. The woman, who grew tired of the aggravating man, applied to Çapanoğlu Süleyman Bey for help. At the Bey's command, she went one night to the married man's house and confronted him. When she declared, I am a woman of honor, don't bother me anymore, the man attacked her, and Çapanoğlu (who had witnessed the entire event from a nearby hiding place) had the man hanged the same night -- in the Yozgat town center. But the episode that actually gave birth to the idiom has a rather humble old donkey to thank. It seems that said old donkey was seen nibbling from hunger on the bellrope in front of a grand mansion. When citizens reported to Çapanoğlu that the donkey was weak and in poor condition, he initiated a search for the donkey's owner. And when the owner was found, justice was swift and harsh. For failing to care for the donkey, Çapanoğlu gave the owner 100 lashes of the long whip -- at a public flogging. On top of that, the man was ordered to feed the donkey five bushels of barley a day, to give it a daily washing and grooming, and to report in person once a week with the donkey for inspection by Çapanoğlu. The old donkey (because of all this special treatment) gained quite a bit of weight in very short order, apparently. And when citizens questioned the owner about the reason behind the old donkey's vigorous new appearance, the owner (remembering well the sting of the long whip) replied, Semirir elbet arkasında Çapanoğlu var. (Well, of course he's gained weight Çapanoğlu is behind it.) And, over the years, the idiom has gradually evolved from 'arkasında Çapanoğlu var' to 'altından çapanoğlu çıkmak' -- as a sort of warning to those who think no one is watching… color bar 254 Ayağının altına karpuz kabuğu koymak Literal meaning to put a watermelon skin under his foot Idiomatic meaning to oust someone from their position The Rest of the Idiom Story...It seems there was a woman-chasing müezzin [prayer-caller] at the mosque. And, ever time he ascended to the top of the minaret to make the call to prayer, he'd ogle the women in the neighboring houses below. Finally, one of the women got fed up and told her husband about it. Her husband became furious and started off to give the muezzin a vicious whipping. But he was intercepted by his son who said, Wait father, leave this matter to me. You're too angry to think straight. You'll just get in a fight, and that could land you in trouble. I've got a better idea. And his father agreed. So, the young man went to the market and bought a watermelon, and sliced it up nicely for his friends and family. After the fruit had been eaten, he carefully cut up the skin in neat little squares. And he took them to the mosque and waited. When the time for evening prayer approached, the muezzin began to make his way up the minaret stairway to issue the prayer call. The young man followed him secretly and strategically placed the watermelon-skin squares on every step of the minaret staircase -- from top to bottom. And then the young-man disappeared into the twilight. When the muezzin completed the 'call to prayer' he took a few moments to ogle the woman below, and then began his descent. On the very first step he slipped -- and began a mighty head-over-heels fall that didn't end until he had reached the bottom of the stone stair-case, in a heap of broken bones and bloody bruises. And when he finally got out of the hospital, he took up work as a vegetable seller -- and he never ascended a minaret staircase anywhere again. color bar color bar color bar 255 aynı tüfeğin demirinden Literal meaning from the iron of the same gun Idiomatic meaning two physical things that share the same characteristic two situations or things of a negative nature that resemble each other The story... Our source for this idiom attributes it to some boastful hunters. One day at the coffee shop where the hunters usually met to exaggerate their activities, one of their number began boasting about the superiority of his gun. It's extremely sensitive, he said, It never shifts left or right when I fire. Its sight is true, and no matter what I aim at -- be it a partridge or a rabbit -- it always delivers the bullet perfectly to the target without killing it, only enough to disable. A non-hunting regular of the coffee house overheard the boast and tossed off this remark to his friends (just loud enough for the whole room to hear), I have a fire poker in my house that's probably made from the same iron as his gun (aynı tüfeğin demirinden). Because every time I throw it at my wife, I hit her in the heel -- a precise disabling blow. color bar The Best of the Turkish Idiom Stories -- beginning with the letter B Bir sıcrasın çekerge, iki sıcrasın çekerge, üçücüde ele geçersin çekirge. Literal meaning Let the grasshopper jump once, let the grasshopper jump twice, on the third time he'll be caught. Idiomatic meaning You can't always trust to luck. The story... During the reign of the Sultan Murad I, there dwelled in Bursa an old man and his wife. The old couple lived a simple, clean, rather poor existence. One day, the old man's wife went to the hamam. After she finished bathing, she couldn't find her clothing bundle where she'd left it in the changing room. In the place where it had been, she saw a fancily embroi- 256 dered clothing valise -- on a fine rug, next to some mother of pearl clogs. The woman asked the hamamci (the hamam caretaker) about her belongings, and he replied, We've moved your old rags to the cooling room. Go over there and dress yourself quickly and go on your way. The Chief Astrologer's wife has just arrived, these are her things -- and she mustn't see you here. This insult greatly upset the bedraggled old woman -- and she wept and sobbed all the way home. So, by the time she opened the front door, she was in a terrible state. She confronted her poor husband angrily, Either you become Sultan Murad's Chief Astrologer or let's get divorced. The old man, who could see no other choice, set up shop the next morning on the street as an amateur astrologer -- in order to gain experience at the trade. Days passed without a customer and one evening on his way home, he prayed pitifully, Oh God, you know my dreadful situation. Please don't break up my comfortable nest of these many years. Let me take refuge under your shelter. And, please don't shame me, he begged… The very next day God smiled down, and he got his first customer. A rich woman approached him and said emotionally, Oh Astrologer, you've got to help me. I've lost my favorite diamond ring given to me by my sweet lover. No other astrologer has been able to help. Can you. she sobbed. Saying the 'Islamic formula', the old man started scribbling on the paper in front of him and suddenly had an inspiration. Ah dear lady, he said, I think your ring may have been swallowed by an animal in your garden. The woman ran immediately to her home. For she now remembered that when she had washed her hands after kneading some dough, she had left the ring on the corner of the water pump in the garden -- right next to where her pet turkey roamed freely… And, just as the 'astrologer' had predicted…when she had the turkey's stomach opened, they found her precious ring. From that day forward the old man (who credited his good fortune to God's intervention) had plenty of clients. His fame spread far and wide -and his wealth increased accordingly. 257 The 'new' astrologers name even reached the palace of Sultan Murad, the Padişah. And one day, the old man was called there -- because the Padişah also had lost a large diamond ring. The sultan ponderously ordered the would-be astrologer to find the ring, without delay, or face the consequences. Grasping at straws and stalling for time, the old man said 'Mighty majesty, I'll gladly carry out your order. But, this is the lost ring of a Padişah, so it will take me a while to bring all my powers to bear on the mystery. For this job, I need time to meditate in peace, at home. Please, permit me 40 days and nights -- I mustn't be hasty. The Padişah agreed and starting the next day, he had meals sent to the astrologer's home every morning, noon, and night -- in the care of the same trusted servant. And every time the servant brought a food tray he'd say, Here is your meal. Our dear sultan is praying for you. Good appetite. As the days passed, the old man became increasingly panicked -- because he had no idea where the ring could be. And he would turn to his wife in the presence of the servant and cry, Oh Woman, pray that God will help me…I only have 30 days…20 days…10 days...left. And these lamentations seemed to increasingly disturb the servant. Finally with only one day remaining, when the servant brought the old man his breakfast, he found him moaning in a state of collapsed despair. My goodness, old man, said the servant, stop this moaning. My conscience is killing me. Here, take the ring. It was I who stole it, he confessed in a rush. The old man was so relieved that he nearly swooned. And he grabbed the ring from the servant's hand and quickly returned it to the Sultan. But in a tenderhearted gesture that spared the poor servant's neck, he said that the genies had brought it to him. The Sultan was astonished at the astrologer's last-minute success. And, at a magnificent state ceremony the next day, he made the old man his new Chief Astrologer -- after dispatching the former Chief Astrologer 'to Him above'. In addition to this fine new job at the palace, the Sultan also offered to grant the old man his fondest wish. The old man remembered that it was the insult to his wife in the hamam that had brought him to this position in the first place. So he asked for and received the entire hamam, along 258 with the now bootlicking and brown-nosing hamamci. His wife was overjoyed and proceeded at once to make the hamamci's life a misery. But the old man, instead of being happy at his latest good fortune, began to panic again. He had twice been saved by God's fortuitous intervention, he realized, and his luck could run out at any time -- with deadly consequences. Eventually, he couldn't sleep from worrying that he might fail at the Sultan's next bidding. So, he decided to ask to be relieved of his duties -- and with this intention he went to the palace. The Padishah admitted the astrologer into his presence in the palace garden. And there, without allowing the first word to be spoken, he extended his closed hand to the astrologer. Do you know, Chief Astrologer, what I have in my palm. he asked sternly. The old man felt doomed. He had no hope at all that he could know the answer to this third, most crucial mystery. Fearfully, he summed up his predicament and murmured to himself The grasshopper may jump once, it may even jump twice, but on the third time the grasshopper will be caught . With that the Sultan let out a whoop, and no one was more surprised than the old astrologer himself when the Sultan opened his outstretched hand - and displayed the grasshopper sitting there in his palm. Unbelievable, Chief Astrologer, you are really amazing. exclaimed the Sultan, with a huge smile on his face. The old man passed out from the shock and the sultan placed him under the care of the harem girls. It took him another 40 days and 40 nights to recover…And when he exited the confinement, his wife was astonished at his vigorous and youthful appearance. color bar color bar color bar 259 The Best of the Turkish Idiom Stories -- beginning with the letter D Dimyat'a pirince giderken evdeki bulgurdan olmak Literal meaning to be without bulgur at home when you go to Dimyat (Damietta) for rice Idiomatic meaning to lose what one already has in the pursuit of what one presumes to be better The story…Once upon an Ottoman time, a rich Turkish rice-merchant set sail from İstanbul with a money-belt full of gold -- heading for Dimyat. There he planned to buy a large consignment of fine rice, which he could turn into great profit at home. In fact, he'd already begun spending the expected profit on credit -- which his moneylender had been pleased to advance. Sadly, his ship was hijacked in the Mediterranean by an Arab pirate -who stripped and robbed the poor rıce-merchant clean, taking all the gold in his overstuffed money-belt. After he returned to Turkey, the rice-merchant was beset by 1,001 difficulties -- and had to declare bankruptcy. So he abandoned İstanbul and retreated to his hometown, Karaman, where at least he still had a few productive wheat fields. But, faced with growing financial problems, he had no choice but to surrender his entire crop to the moneylender -- who set off with it for İstanbul where he reckoned that he might turn a greater profit. And, that winter…the poor rice-merchant's family suffered greatly, unable even to afford plain bulgur (a wheat by-product) for their own pitiful dining table. He had lost the simple pleasure of that 'ordinary' mealtime staple at home -- because of his pursuit of the fine rice of Dimyat, abroad. And a Turkish idiom was borne… color bar color bar color bar color bar 260 The Best of the Turkish Idiom Stories -- beginning with the letter G Geçti Bor'un pazarı, sür eşşeği Niğde'ye. Literal meaning The bazaar at Bor is over, drive the stupid donkey to Niğde. Idiomatic meaning You missed your chance, it's too to do anything (about it). The story…In the old days, the bazaar at Bor lasted a shorter time than