mine. 4. Their opinions on just about everything are so that it is amazing that they don't argue all the time. 5. She currently a project which aims to educate young people about the environment and how to protect it. ELS 265 According to the lore of traditional Chinese medicine, the greater the likeness, the more formidable its medicinal qualities. And for thousands of years Chinese from all walks of life have coveted the fleshy root. Emperors ruling from the confines of the Forbidden City made a point of supping the bitter herb each day to improve their intellectual abilities. Peasants in the countryside used it more judiciously, ingesting it to cure disease or give them a boost when energy levels ebbed. Today, the list of ailments and diseases apparently cured by ginseng reads like an index to a medical textbook. Few of the claims are supported by scientific proof, though. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as plant fibre or fat h) enclosed area i) drink in small amounts j) person who works on the land for very low wages, or who earns his living from a very small piece of land k) sensibly with good judgement I) take in food m) something that increases the amount or level of something n) become weak or less 266 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Despite lack of scientific evidence that it actually works A) the Emperors of China took ginseng daily B) the Chinese refuse to replace ginseng with any modern medicines C) intellectual abilities have been seen to improve with the regular use of ginseng D) ginseng is used in the treatment of a wide range of illnesses E) ginseng is accepted by many medical practitioners today 2. In traditional Chinese medicine, a medicinal plant A) is less effective the less it resembles the human shape B) can only be prescribed to Emperors C) must be taken each day in order to have any effect D) is best when it is thousands of years old E) is used more by peasants than people from other walks of life 3. In the writer's opinion, Chinese peasants A) did not have the intellectual abilities of the Emperors B) relied more heavily on ginseng than other Chinese people C) knew the most about which ailments could be cured by ginseng D) needed higher energy levels than people in other walks of life E) were more sensible in their use of ginseng than the Emperors 1. Investment from foreign governments has given a real to the economy. 2. He is surprisingly agile for such a/an 3. One of the great things about going to university is that you get the opportunity to meet man. people from all 4. What is said today should be limited to the of this office, and not repeated around the factory. 5. When I looked at his application form, I realized that he had such a/an list of qualifications that the position on offer would be beneath him. ELS 267 Because of its widespread use geographically, and because of the large number of people who speak it, it has been adopted as the language of aviation and air traffic. English has continued as one of the important languages of commerce, as the sphere of political and economic influence of the English-speaking nations has extended far beyond their own boundaries. The use of English in international diplomacy is strengthened by its acceptance as one of the official languages of the United Nations. And as a final example, English is the language of the majority of published materials in the world, so that education, especially specialized higher education, has come to rely very heavily on an understanding of English. In no sense does English replace the cultural heritage and emotional ties of the first language, but for many speakers throughout the world, it provides a means of communicating with people of similar training and interests who would otherwise not be able to comprehend them. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as made very particular and specific, as a job or field or study g) customs and traditions considered as a whole and as coming from one's ancestors h) connection i) a way or method enabling one to do something (phrase) j) 268 understand (completely) ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. It is stated in the passage that English A) is a second language used by all nations B) has enabled England to spread its influence beyond its borders C) is spoken by the majority of people in the world D) is the only language used in specialized higher education E) is not exclusively spoken at the United Nations 2. According to the passage, English as a second language A) has increased its influence around the world due to its use in aviation B) has strengthened its grip on international diplomacy C) does not take the place of the mother tongue either culturally or emotionally D) is most important in the world of commerce E) is more important than a person's first language 3. We can infer from the passage that A) English will soon be spoken by everyone in the world B) many educational books and textbooks are written in English C) England's political influence is constantly increasing D) there would be no international diplomacy without English E) people around the world would not have such similar interests without English 1. I'm sure his becoming so friendly with the boss's son is just getting himself noticed for promotion. 2. My brother brought a kind of miniature violin back from Kenya, but it's more ornamental than it is 3. , because it doesn't actually make any sound at all. Much as she would like to work overseas, she has such strong family that I don't think she could cope with being away for so long. 4. Although he works in the textiles industry, he doesn't actually work with textiles. Rather, his 5. Translation is a very particular is public relations. skill and requires more than just a good knowledge of both languages. ELS 269 Thus, for the purposes of health education in schools, it is best approached from the point of view of function rather than structure. The detailed anatomy and physiology of the heart and circulation, for instance, are not needed, but students should know that the heart's function improves with use and that regular exercise is the best way to avoid distress upon exertion. Thus, the basic knowledge required to live a healthy life is that oxygen is supplied to the muscles by a partnership of lungs and heart, the lungs taking in a supply and the heart distributing it. Exercise involves a call for more oxygen and, if the heart is not trained to deliver a full volume of blood with each beat, the lungs must work harder to compensate. These simple facts can be appreciated without the need for elaborate detail. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as physical effort g) main most important h) organs in the body that are used to produce movement i) relationship in which two or more things work j) give or send out together k) be taught and given practice in be given experience of I) take to the intended recipient or place m) amount or quantity n) regular rhythmical movement o) do something that makes up for, or cancels out, the bad effect of something else p) involving and paying a lot of attention to all the different parts 270 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The writer mentions heart and circulation A) because they are the most important structures in the human body B) since students have great difficulty understanding their relationship C) in order to illustrate the extent to which students should be taught human biology D) as these parts of the body are frequently damaged by excessive exercise E) as examples of the areas in which health education is lacking 2. We can infer from the passage that by training the heart A) people can expect to live much longer B) we become capable of doing more complicated activities C) the lungs' function in the partnership becomes virtually redundant D) people can easily survive with a single lung E) we can prevent the lungs from overworking 3. According to the passage, health education in schools should be A) detailed B) functional C) anatomical D) structural E) physiological 1. We expect your company to us for all the inconvenience you have caused us over the past month. 2. The aim of the charity is to provide shelter for homeless people. 3. As the cat seemed to be in some 4. The company has been doing a much greater , we took it to the veterinarian. of foreign trade since the customs regulations were relaxed. 5. A number of volunteers were in the market place leaflets to passersby. ELS 271 It was intended to be the third mission to land on the Moon. An oxygen tank in the Service Module exploded while the spacecraft was on its way to the Moon, requiring the mission to be aborted the Moon landing was cancelled and only a single pass around the Moon was made. Considerable ingenuity under extreme pressure was required from both the crew and the ground controllers to figure out how to jury-rig the craft for the crew's safe return, with much of the world watching the drama on television. Reentry into the Earth's atmosphere required the unusual step of undocking the lunar module, which had been retained for the flight back to Earth, in addition to the separation of the damaged service module. The lunar module had remained attached to the spacecraft to provide emergency propulsion and life support. The crew returned unharmed to the Earth. After some three months of study, the cause of the explosion was traced to two inadequate thermostatic switches in an oxygen-tank heater assembly. Dysfunction of the switches under load caused overheating that led to an insulation fire, and the subsequent blast tore a side panel from the service module and disabled the fuel cells. Other defects in manufacture and in testing procedures were also found. Further Apollo flights were delayed until 1971 so that modifications could be made to prevent similar incidents. Jim Lovell, who was one of the crew members, wrote a book about the mission, Lost Moon, which was later turned into a successful movie, Apollo 13 , starring Tom Hanks. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as stop before something is completed large or relatively large in amount or degree skill in inventing things or in working out plans workout (phrase) fix something that has broken away temporarily using whatever materials are available, but not necessarily the right materials (of spaceships) the separation of a part of a spaceship in space continue to keep something, especially when useful power that moves something, especially a vehicle, in a forward direction following after something, often as a result of the first thing (phrase) a group of experts who meet for a common purpose go back over again to discover the reason for something not enough insufficient not good enough a small control for an electrical device which you use to operate it something which has been fitted together as part of a machine incorrect operation or damaged in operation a thick layer of material that is used to stop heat escaping from something happening or existing at a later time than something else a large violent explosion fault orweakness 272 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, the plan to return the Apollo 13's crew safely to the Earth A) failed to save all the crew B) was defective and amateurish C) required inventive skills D) was led by Edgar M. Cortright E) was put off until 1971 2. As was stated in the passage, Jim Lovell ...... . A) managed to return to the Earth, but with injuries B) starred in a movie about the Apollo 13 mission C) led the investigation into the near disaster D) is an author with no first-hand knowledge of space travel E) was among the crew of the Apollo 13 3. According to the details in the passage, the Apollo 13 mission could be described as A) a perfect example for future space missions to follow B) a successful attempt to land for the third time on the Moon C) a planned space mission that never left the ground D) a dramatic, eventful, but unsuccessful mission to land on the Moon E) the first space mission broadcast live on television A team of commandos was to fly secretly to the area to free the hostages, but the action was when the negotiations began producing some results. 2. A student who had been travelling on the coach showed remarkable when he suggested using his mother's nylon tights as a temporary belt for the engine. This temporary belt allowed the coach to reach the nearest town where proper repairs could be carried out. 3. The government investigation board the cause of the train crash to some loose bolts on the railway line. 4. The mechanic said that there was a fault on a switch in the air conditioning on my car and that, unfortunately, Renault only sold complete air conditioning systems. 5. Air travel in the United States declined dramatically the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001. ELS 273 Was he a hero or a villain. Did he really exist at all. In the early 1850s, Mexican immigrant Joaquin Murieta was real to Californians he was wanted, dead or alive, for robbery. He was a hero to Mexicans who resented the prejudice they faced in the United States. Some scholars today believe his story to be no more than a legend. Church records show that Joaquin Murieta was baptized in Sonora, Mexico, in 1830. In 1848, he and his wife moved to California, where, during the rush of 1849, he prospected for gold. Miners in the United States resented the competition from Mexican miners. In 1850, California passed the Greaser Act and Foreign Miners Act, which discouraged Mexican prospecting in California. It was then that the legend of Joaquin Murieta began. Bands of Mexican outlaws staged raids throughout the San Joaquin and Sacramento valleys, robbing miners and stagecoaches to protest the anti-Mexican legislation. The organizer of these raids was believed to be Murieta, though whether he controlled any or all of the outlaw bands was never proved. California's governor offered a reward for Murieta's capture, and in 1853, the Texas ranger Harry Love produced the head of a Mexican he claimed was Murieta. The raids came to an end, but rumour had it that Murieta lived on and died in the 1870s at his birthplace. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as e) explore for gold or other valuable minerals f) a group of people having a common purpose g) someone who has committed a crime and is hiding from the authorities of the law h) a sudden surprise attack i) a large four-wheeled horse-drawn vehicle formerly used to carry passengers, mail, etc. j) laws which have been passed k) take as a prisoner I) someone who is employed to patrol a region m) information, often a mixture of truth and untruth, passed on by word of mouth 274 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. After reading the passage, we can say with absoiuie certainty that Joaquin Murieta A) was wanted by the Californian authorities in the 1850s B) controlled all the groups of Mexicans attacking miners C) was not actually a brutal outlaw D) never actually existed at all E) was killed by the Mexican ranger Harry Love 2. It is stated in the passage that in order to keep foreigners from prospecting in California A) Texas rangers guarded the mines B) raids were staged against Mexican stagecoaches C) foreigners were given restricted freedom D) Mexicans were forcibly sent home E) new laws were passed 3. According to the passage, Joaquin Murieta was A) certainly captured by Harry Love and imprisoned B) considered a criminal by some and a hero by others C) given permission from the Californian authorities to return home to retire D) robbed by a gang of Mexican outlaws E) married to a woman who was a member of his band The local fishermen the newcomers, who appeared to work harder, used more dangerous equipment, and sold their catches more cheaply. 2. After violent air 3. There is a/an in World War II, which caused great destruction, the ancient British city of Coventry was rebuilt. going around in our office that the manager is , considering handing in his resignation. 4. In 19th-century America, on travelling through the land, a man with a shotgun would normally sit outside beside the driver, in case of attack by bandits. 5. Many people don't want the terrorist to have his sentence reduced. Even though he is now a sick old man, most still see him as a/an who was responsible for the senseless deaths of dozens of people. ELS 275 Archaeologists have found an amazing quantity of these in mummy bundles tucked away in tombs. These ancient people of the Andean region, like those of Egypt, believed the dead needed articles from this life to use in their future life. Some fragments of the cloth are 3,000 years old, but the finest examples belong to the period between about AD 300 and 1000. The people who wove these textiles spun fine, smooth yarn of cotton or of the wool of alpacas, llamas, and vicunas. They used most weaves known today and some too complicated for modern looms. They were expert dyers, with almost 200 hues at their command. With their many-coloured yarns they worked out gay, elaborate designs. They wove cloth ingeniously into the shapes of garments and other articles, for they did not cut and sew. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a) a long, flat, narrow piece of something b) a number of things or a quantity of material loosely bound together c) store, especially in a place a little difficult to find (phrase) d) a place for the burial of the dead (sometimes a building, underground passage, or an excavation in rock) e) item thing of a certain kind, especially small objects f) ' a small piece or part of something g) pull out and twist natural fibres, such as silk, cotton and wool, into a long continuous thread h) silky to the touch not rough i) a continuous twisted strand of natural or synthetic fibres, used in weaving and knitting j) a piece of equipment, worked by hand or by machine, for weaving yarn k) someone who is skilled at colouring fabrics with natural or synthetic substances I) a shade of a colour m) having an ability for something and being able to use it fully {phrase) n) brightly coloured brilliant o) ornate and detailed p) skilfully cleverly rrt an itfim of clothing 276 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. It is clear from the passage that the ancient peoples of both Peru and Egypt A) used the wool of llama to produce cloth B) weaved patterns too complicated for today's looms C) did not cut or sew to make a garment D) believed in another life after death E) rose to their peak in the year AD 1000 2. According to the passage, some of the fabrics made in Peru over 1000 years ago A) were made of synthetic fibres B) were sown together with great skill C) were identical to materials made in Egypt D) were only produced in a few colours E) would be difficult to make on modern looms 3. The dyers described in the passage A) were skilled in the use of sewing machines B) knitted the fabric instead of using looms C) produced excellent fabric by using multi-coloured yarns simultaneously D) were able to use 200 shades on one piece of cloth E) were skilled in achieving different shades of colour 1. An inventor has produced a bed that actually gently throws the sleeper out of bed when the alarm rings. Although it is designed, manufacturers are reluctant to start production as they are not sure whether the public is ready for such a rude awakening . 2. Michelle's favourite sweater is the one her mom knit for her using hand-spun 3. Cedrick makes a little extra money by selling firewood. He collects sticks, which he ties in small 4. and sells for one pound each. He started to work for himself with just one truck. Now he has a fleet of 40 modern trucks A 5. You don't have to buy too many things for the new baby. I have lots of baby equipment in the garage somewhere. I'll search for it when I have the time. ELS 277 Yet the origin of this famous name for Americans is a mystery. Scholars once thought it came from Yengees, which was supposed to be the way the American Indians pronounced the word English, or its French equivalent, Anglais. Another theory is that a Dutch nickname Yankey is the source, because as early as 1683 it was used by Dutch sailors. Yankey may have been derived from Janke, a diminutive of the Dutch name Jan. in colonial America the colonists of other regions rather scornfully called New Englanders Yankees. The British did not observe the local distinction and used the term for all of the colonists. During the American Civil War, Southerners spoke of all Northerners as Yankees. The British called United States soldiers Yanks in both World Wars, and eventually, the term became popular as a nickname for all Americans. The origin of the song Yankee Doodle is also uncertain. This sprightly, impudent tune had become popular in the colonies by 1770. The British used it to make fun of the Americans early in the Revolution, but the victorious Americans adopted it as their own marching song. The best known verse runs Yankee Doodle went to town Riding on a pony Stuck a feather in his hat And called it Macaroni. Macaroni was the name given to English dandies. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as f) g) h) i) j) k) I) m) 278 an informal name given to someone by others something that and cannot be explained say in a particular way having the same use, function, amount, etc. a name that is formed with a suffix to indicate fondness or one's superiority to the named person without respect in a disdainful manner a difference between similar things lively full of spirit and vitality rude showing disrespect having won a struggle, war, or competition walking with regular steps, especially in a procession of some kind one part into which a poem or song is divided, arranged in lines which have a rhythm and often rhyme a man who thinks a great deal about his appearance and always dresses in smart clothes ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, the term Yank A) has been replaced by the term Yankey B) is used to refer to all Americans today C) was first used to describe American Indians D) was applied to Northern American soldiers in the Civil War E) is always used disrespectfully 2. From the information in the passage, we understand that the song Yankee Doodle A) was a favourite of American Indians B) was written by an English dandy C) would be sung by Dutch sailors as early as 1683 D) used to be sung by American revolutionaries E) was popular in Britain before it became so in America 3. Although the origin of the nickname Yankee is a mystery, the author A) is certain it is derived from the French word Anglais B) thinks a Dutch origin is the most likely C) is sure of the origin of the song Yankee Doodle D) believes it could have derived from a British word for soldier E) points out two possible sources of the word 1. Although there are only minor in vocabulary between the languages of the Serbs and the Croats, they use different alphabets. 2. All applicants are required to possess a degree in chemical engineering or an professional qualification. 3. Elizabeth is only fifteen, but she plays the trumpet in the Air Training Corps Band and sometimes takes part in street parades. 4. The Duke considered the young man to be because of the way he had spoken to him. 5. Most people are familiar with the national anthem, but few know more than the first two ELS 279 In ancient Egypt, where the idea originated, the head was usually a portrait of the reigning pharaoh. It also represented the sky god Horus. The Egyptians always pictured their kings as calm and stately, with wide-open, staring eyes. The lion's body - symbolizing courage - is crouched with its front feet outstretched. From Egypt the idea of the sphinx spread to the Syrians and Phoenicians and finally to the Greeks. These peoples gave the creature the head and bust of a woman. They added an eagle's wings to represent majesty and a long serpent's tail to indicate wiliness. In later Greek literature, the sphinx was no monster, but a beautiful, wise and mysterious woman. The Great Sphinx at Giza was carved in about 2600 BC. It stands near the three great pyramids, gazing across the Nile to the east. The head is a portrait of Khafre, a pharaoh of the Old Kingdom. Near the sphinx rises Khafre's tomb, the second of the three great pyramids. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as craftiness being cunning j) clever knowing k) puzzling being unexplained I) be shaped by tools be cut to form something m) looking in a fixed way in wonder or in order to admire something 280 ELS ' . . ' ' ' Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, Egyptian sphinxes A) normally depicted the people's ruler B) had the wings of an eagle C) were more like a bust than a complete figure D) were usually of the size of a lion E) were found inside the tomb of a ruler 2. It is understood from the passage that sphinxes A) were only common in Egypt B) were always carved to resemble Khafre C) were usually standing upright D) became popular with several civilizations E) became less intricate with time 3. It is clear from the passage that the Great Sphinx at Giza A) can be found near the tomb of the pharaoh depicted on its head B) is not a monster at all but a beautiful intelligent female C) was carved by the sky god Horus D) is the largest of all sphinxes in the world E) appears in later Greek literature 1. My son woke up screaming and saying that a/an had come out of his wardrobe. I convinced him that the purple, horned creature was purely imaginary. 2. The disappearance of the first English settlers in North Carolina has never been explained. A colony had been set up in 1587, but in 1591, a returning settler found no trace of them. 3. The man had bears, eagles and wolves out of logs and was selling his craftwork by the roadside. 4. Caught behind enemy lines, the two parachutists down behind some 5. Queen Cleopatra took her own life and died, according to recorded history, as a result of a bushes until dark. bite from a poisonous ELS 281 At the end of the 19th century, Ogai Mori helped to modernize both Japanese medicine and Japanese literature. Ogai Mori, whose real name was Rintaro Mori, was born in Tsuwano, Japan, on February 17, 1862. He graduated from the University of Tokyo medical school, and from 1884 to 1888, studied in Germany as a military doctor. This stay in Europe affected him profoundly, and he returned home convinced that Japan should embrace the best of European culture and medicine, but selectively, without recklessly destroying traditional Japanese ways. In 1893, he was appointed head of Japan's military academy, but his literary career had already begun. His first story, The Dancing Girl, a tale based on friends he had made in Germany, was published in Japanese in 1890. This caused a sensation among Japanese writers, wjio had a tradition of composing less personal works, and the course of Japanese fiction was changed. Mori's most popular novel, The Wild Goose, was also based on his own experiences. After 1912, Mori concentrated on more factual, historical works, often with samurai warriors as their heroes. These books were less emotional than his earlier novels, but they had a striking, powerful style. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as be officially given a job g) story h) general public excitement i) produce create, especially a musical or literary work j) onward movement progression direction k) relating to the truth real I) principal male character in a novel, play, etc. a man of exceptional courage m) having or showing strong feelings n) dramatic impressive and attracting attention 282 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, Ogai Mori believed that A) Japan's traditional culture would be destroyed if Japan adopted any European ideas B) Japan needed to drop all of its traditions and take up a European cultural style C) he would have had more success if he had published his books in Germany D) Japan should carefully choose which parts of European culture to adopt E) Japanese fiction was too emotional to appeal to modern readers 2. Ogai Mori's first book was different from those of other Japanese writers in general in that it A) consisted mainly of biographies B) was based on the author's own experiences C) did not praise traditional Japanese ways D) was more fictional and emotional E) told of the lives of ordinary people in Germany 3. It is clear from the passage that Ogai Mori A) was not very successful in his medical career B) had more influence as a doctor than as a writer C) met fierce opposition from Japanese traditionalists D) was as famous in Germany as he was in Japan E) made a lasting impression on Japanese literary style 1. The thief was picking people out of the crowd as they left the shopping centre - picking out affluent-looking women. 2. Michael is that Quebec, his homeland, should become independent from the rest of Canada, and he campaigns tirelessly for this. 3. I don't like the woman who has been 4. At only seventeen years of age, Wayne Rooney was such a talented young footballer that he caused a head of our department. among the fans when he appeared in his first game for the club and immediately scored a goal. 5. I became very while watching the film Billy Elliot , and tears began pouring down my cheeks. ELS 283 After their visit, each wrote a book. Beaumont's volume is about slavery, while Tocqueville's is the classic Democracy in America. Publication of the books obscured the original purpose of their visit the two men had been sent to the United States as delegates from the French government to inspect the American prison system. They were among many Europeans who visited the United States with the same intention, because the modern prison system for the confinement of convicted criminals was invented in the United States in the 1790s. Places of confinement were not new. London had its Tower and Paris its Bastille. However, these were for confining political prisoners, not criminals in the ordinary sense. The common jail has existed since at least 1166, when England's King Henry II ordered jails built. Jails were then, as they are now, mainly for prisoners awaiting trial, but they also held petty offenders such as beggars and debtors. What was new about the American prison system was its purpose. It was designed more as a means of reforming the offender than as punishment for committing a crime. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as minor of little importance g) a person who asks for food or money in the street, especially one who does this for a living h) a person who owes money i) method a way of achieving a result j) improve someone's behaviour teach someone to accept normal standards 284 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. It is clear that neither of the books mentioned in the passage A) achieved considerable success in France B) was based on the official work of its author in America C) could explain the American prison system effectively D) touched the slavery system then in operation in America E) could be called reformist in a general sense 2. The passage makes it clear that the modern prison system A) was first established in America B) houses mainly debtors and beggars C) was in operation in England in 1166 D) was designed by King Henry II E) was first founded according to a French design 3. It is clear in the passage that the two Frenchmen A) proved very successful in reforming the French prison service B) were both helpful in bringing an end to the slave trade in Europe C) helped develop the modern prison system that concentrated on reforming prisoners D) were rather critical of the new American prison system E) were not the only Europeans dispatched to America to look at their prison system 1. Reports in the newspapers are raising people's fears of street crime, vandalism and drug use, but these issues 2. the true problem of increased social deprivation. After behaving immorally for many years, John himself and became a model citizen. 3. Because some teenagers commit many crimes, such as small thefts and vandalism, the government has introduced a system in which a criminal is sent to prison for the third crime committed, even if that crime is only a minor offence. 4. He was such a badly-behaved prisoner that he was placed in solitary , locked up all alone for twenty-four hours a day. 5. Of course, he could be innocent, but he is already a/an criminal, having been found guilty of two previous robberies. It is a picture of a thought process. Klee has given us an idea of what an intention might be composed of. Slightly to the left of the centre is a simplified outline of a body and in the head at the top is a single eye. A large number of forms surround it, signifying the thoughts which might go to make up an intention. Many are easily distinguished - a tree, an animal, several figures. Others are vague, and the simple forms might be interpreted in many ways. Some of these are shown by themselves, but some are joined to other forms. The background is a clear brick, red on one side, and dull green on the other side. Perhaps the painter is saying that some thoughts are sharp and clearly remembered, while others are dim and vague. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a drawing consisting only of external lines g) be a sign of indicate, show or suggest h) identified as a particular thing i) not clear in shape or form j) give or explain the meaning of something k) a rectangular block, usually a distinct red, made of clay and baked, to be used in house construction I) lacking brightness m) clearly defined n) not clearly seen 286 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, those looking at Paul Klee's Intention A) will see a detailed portrait of a person B) would enjoy the beautiful landscape with animals and trees C) would definitely appreciate his ability D) might express different interpretations of the painting E) can't help noticing his sharp brush movements 2. It is implied in the passage that the artist A) mostly uses dull colours B) only uses clearly defined images C) wasn't trained at an art school D) was a distinguished member of the art world E) uses colour purposefully 3. It is clear from the passage that, of the forms around the head in the picture Intention , A) some are on their own while some are linked to others B) the brightest in colour is the brick C) the trees are clearer than the animals D) the background consisting of red and green bricks is the most striking E) the eye is the best remembered It is his to become a doctor, as this would be rewarding both emotionally and financially. 2. The popular musical West Side Story the Shakespearean play 3. One of my first memories is of singing at school. I remember the first line of the song clearly, Romeo and Juliet for its plot and drama. but everything else is a bit The actual concert is only a dim recollection. 4. My brother has been busy preparing for Christmas. He has arranged coloured lights on the outside wall so that, when they are lit up at night, they make a/an of Father Christmas. 5. Franz Kafka's short story The Penal Colony can be in many ways, and experts cannot agree on the actual meaning of the many aspects of this horrific tale. ELS 287 Such 18th-century authorphilosophers as Voltaire and Jean-Jacques Rousseau were instrumental in shaping the ideas of modern France, and the works of Jean Racine, Moliere and other neoclassical playwrights are still widely performed. Victor Hugo, Honore de Balzac, and Emile Zola were among the literary giants of the 19th century. French authors have won eleven Nobel prizes for literature, far more than those of any other nation. Painting has also long been a vital art form in France. Artists often enjoyed the patronage of the nobility, producing works of quality and variety. During the 1800s, the impressionist movement was largely the inspiration of such French artists as Edgar Degas, Pierre Auguste Renoir and Claude Monet, and many art trends of the 20th century also originated in France. In addition, the atmosphere of free inquiry and artistic integrity that has generally been present in France has attracted many artists and writers from other countries. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as having an important function g) cause the way something develops h) extremely important i) the supporting or aiding, usually financially, of an artist by someone j) a socially or politically privileged class whose titles are inherited or given them by royalty k) the effect of something on others who are developing creative feelings I) request for information questioning m) honesty keeping to one's moral principles 288 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. We learn from the passage that no nation other than France A) has centres where artists meet and exchange ideas B) followed artistic trends that originated in France C) has had patrons of the arts D) has allowed neoclassical playwrights to perform their work E) has had so many authors who have won the Nobel prize for literature 2. The passage tells us that the impressionist movement A) was largely a twentieth-century trend B) was, in great part, inspired by a number of French artists C) was led primarily by Voltaire and Rousseau D) was a French form of drama E) provided the winners of eleven Nobel prizes 3. It is mentioned in the passage that A) French art is a little hard to appreciate for outsiders B) the French people themselves don't take much interest in art C) artists from other countries also flock to France D) the art industry today in France would collapse without the support of the nobility E) productivity in the arts in France is diminishing The small town of Hay-on-Wye, England, not only has a literary festival, but also has over thirty second-hand bookshops. It is a 2. for book collectors. The American Cordell Hull won the 1945 Nobel Peace Prize mainly because he was so in organizing the United Nations. 3. If you are considering him as a business partner, you must be sure of his first, because you can't work with someone whom you don't trust. 4. A/An to storytellers, artists and American history writers, the Hudson River has played a strategic role in the growth of the United States. 5. When law and order breaks down, crime immediately starts to ELS 289 Few books by living poets were published, and magazines bought poetry mainly to fill leftover space. She solved the problem by starting her own poetry magazine, Poetry a Magazine of Verse, in 1912, through which she had a major influence on the development of modern poetry. She knew that a new publication with a small circulation could not pay its own way. Nevertheless, she wanted to pay poets for their work and to offer prizes. She could think of only one way to accomplish this to persuade well-to-do people to support the magazine as they did orchestras and art museums. By asking about 100 Chicagoans to pledge $50 annually for five years, Monroe raised the money to launch her magazine. She became the first editor. As its motto she chose a line from Walt Whitman To have great poets there must be great audiences too. Poetry published the work of nearly every notable modern American and British poet. Eliot's The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock , and Vachel Lindsay's The Congo . Monroe never married. Her hobbies were travel and mountain climbing. She continued as editor of Poetry until her death on September 26, 1936, in Peru. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as guarantee promise to do k) every year I) start a new enterprise set something into action m) a saying, word, phrase or sentence chosen to express the goals or ideals of a group, nation, etc. n) striking remarkable important 290 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. In order to bring the work of living poets to the attention of a wide audience, Harriet Monroe A) campaigned in magazines B) started her own poetry magazine C) toured South America D) wrote to Walt Whitman for help E) used leftover space in her magazine Poetry 2. It is noted in the passage that, in order to fund her business venture, Monroe A) used her vast personal wealth B) asked modern poets to donate their work free of charge C) persuaded the rich of Chicago to donate money for the project D) used her wages as the editor of another magazine E) asked for donations from well-known American and British poets 3. According to the passage, Poetry a Magazine of Verse A) never paid for itself B) mainly printed the work of dead poets C) had a significant effect on the advancement of modern verse D) failed to attract the work of notable American and British poets E) had problems finding material to fill leftover space 1. When I visited my uncle in New York, he took me to see the street where the people live, but they had security guards and high fences, so we couldn't even see the houses. 2. The of the Girl Guides is Be Prepared . 3. The British novelist Kingsley Amis was for his contributions to the development of the comic novel. 4. The company $1000 a year to help with the running expenses of the centre. 5. There is an opera and ballet festival held in Aspendos and every year it attracts thousands of visitors. ELS 291 The title page read, Travels into several remote Nations of the World, by Lemuel Gulliver... . Many people accepted this as fact. Travel books of the time told many tales that were no more strange than the imaginary adventures of Gulliver. One sea captain even claimed that he knew Captain Gulliver well. Other readers condemned the book as full of exaggerations. Although it became one of the most famous books for children, it was not written for children. It was savage satire aimed at the human race. The tiny Lilliputians are vain, malicious and bloodthirsty. The king and the court of Lilliput are a parody of the English king and court. The giants of Brobdingnag are amiable, but commonplace and insensitive. Laputa is full of the foolish philosophers and scientists whom Swift despised. The Houyhnhnms are horses who use degraded men, Yahoos, just as men use horses elsewhere. Looking at mankind through the eyes of horses, Swift sees people as vicious, greedy and ignorant. From its first appearance, Gulliver's Travels delighted its readers instead of shocking them. In spite of his bitterness, Swift took a dry delight in making his narrative sound real even when it was fantastic. Children could enjoy the marvellous adventures of a traveller among pygmies and giants, on a flying island, and in a country where horses talk. Thus, Gulliver's Travels soon became a children's classic. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as f) intended to harm others or their reputation spiteful g) very cruel and taking pleasure in killing h) a creature with human shape but enormous size i) friendly and pleasant to be with likeable j) ordinary usual k) unaware of other people's feelings uncaring I) feel a great hatred of m) lowered in, respect or value vulgarized n) given or done with evil or cruel intent o) anger resentment p) quiet and appearing serious but actually very amusing ironic q) story r) existing in the imagination s) a very small race of people or species of animals 292 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. It is clear from the passage that when Gulliver's Travels was first published, A) it had a completely different title B) a number of people believed that it described real adventures C) it was popular with the English king and his court D) it was disliked immensely by philosophers and scientists E) it shocked almost everyone who read it 2. According to the passage, over the years Gulliver's Travels became A) condemned because it contained too many exaggerations B) more popular with adults than children C) an enduring favourite with children D) a well-respected travel book E) less and less popular and was eventually forgotten about 3. We understand from the passage that, through his book, Swift A) made a huge fortune B) expressed his negative opinion of human civilization C) got the idea of writing a number of children's books D) told about his travel to an island where pygmies and giants lived together E) annoyed philosophers and scientists as well as ordinary people 1. He said that he was a catering manager, but this was an as he actually works part-time at McDonald's. 2. He is such a/an person that he has dozens of friends from all over the world. 3. Susan has been spreading some gossip about her manager, hoping that he would get into trouble or be fired from his job. 4. Despite being a university graduate she is so she never has anything 5. Deep in the jungles of central Africa live the tribe known as the Twa. They are interesting to talk about. - no man in the tribe is taller than one and a half metres. ELS 293 He had no technical knowledge to qualify him for the task, but he was a brilliant and persuasive organizer. He also had a determination that helped him overcome repeated failures. The idea of laying a transatlantic cable was not new, but because of the great depths and distance involved, no one had promoted it. In 1854 a Canadian engineer interested Field in laying a cable from St. John's, Newfoundland, to the Canadian mainland. This would speed the receipt of European news by several days. While studying a globe, Field decided that the cable should be extended to Ireland. Laying the Canadian cable took two and a half years. By that time Field had organized companies in the United States and Great Britain to raise funds for an Atlantic cable between the two countries. The first four cables broke, causing heavy losses to investors. The fifth was completed on August 5, 1858. On August 15, Queen Victoria and President James Buchanan exchanged messages on the new cable. Soon, however, the signals became unintelligible, and in October they ceased. Undeterred, Field raised additional funds. After another failure in 1865, the fight was finally won on July 27, 1866. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as obtaining something sent j) an object like a ball, used as a model of the Earth k) a sum of money raised for a cause I) person who puts money into a business or businesses m) give and receive n) unable be understood o) not discouraged 294 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, Cyrus Field completed the laying of a transatlantic cable A) sooner than was originally planned B) with the support of Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom C) with great perseverance and despite several setbacks D) in a time of two and a half years E) thanks to his vast technical knowledge of telecommunications 2. It is clear from the passage that, at the time he first came up with the idea for a transatlantic cable, Cyrus Field A) had already completed a shorter cable in Canada B) was just starting out in the paper business C) was already a wealthy retired businessman D) had studied telecommunications for several years E) had met both Queen Victoria and President James Buchanan 3. It is mentioned in the passage that Cyrus Field was good at A) organizing things B) geography C) fitting cables D) deep-sea diving E) journalism I recorded the interview onto a cassette tape, but apparently, the tape was faulty as most of the recorded interview is 2. Several people laughed at his plans to open an outdoor heated swimming pool in England, 3. The Channel Tunnel connects the island of Great Britain with the but, he built it and opened it to the public last year. of Europe via a railway link. 4. Maps of the world give us a representation of our planet, but they give a somewhat distorted picture as the world is not flat. A/An , however, gives us a far more real idea of how the different continents and oceans combine to make up the Earth. 5. He started his own computer company, but unfortunately, his venture ended in He now has a job with the Post Office and is content with working for someone else. ELS 295 Lions, tigers and other cats were kept in one house monkeys in another birds in another. Single animals in bare cages were not very interesting to the visitors, however. Many animals that live in groups in the wild also did not adapt well to living alone. Modern zoos present the animals by showing them in surroundings that resemble as closely as possible their natural habitats. Visitors to a modern zoo can look across a plain and see lions seemingly free to wander. Nearby are birds, with antelopes and zebras feeding at the edge of a water hole. The other animals are not afraid of the lions because they are separated from them by wide, deep trenches, or sometimes moats. These trenches also separate the visitors from the animals in the exhibit. The trenches are often hidden with plants, and the visitor frequently does not notice them. The animals appear to be living wild in their natural settings. Often what appear to visitors as real trees, rocks and vines, however, are in fact artificial. These naturalistic parts of the exhibit are built of durable materials and designed to withstand rough treatment by the animals. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as apparently g) move or travel about without any course or destination roam h) the border or margin of a surface the line where something begins or ends i) a deep ditch j) a water-filled ditch k) produced by man not occurring naturally I) long-lasting m) endure in a successful way remain whole or firm against force n) not gentle violent 296 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, zoos nowadays are noted for A) parks with fenced enclosures B) single animals in bare cages C) lions freely roaming among visitors D) wild animals getting on well with each other E) having settings similar to nature 2. One of the problems with the older style of zoo mentioned in the passage was A) groups of animals becoming frustrated with each other in cages B) natural surroundings that were not long-lasting C) a lack of public interest in lone animals in standard cages D) rough treatment of natural vegetation by wild animals E) the pressure from animal rights groups 3. In the author's opinion, a modern zoo gives the appearance of A) animals being careful not to fall down steep trenches B) lonely, bored animals in cages C) strong high fences separating lions from other animals D) animals roaming without restrictions E) the environment being totally man-made 1. Different plastics are used for different purposes, but most of them tend to be resistant to corrosion, and thus 2. The path to the church from the farm leads along the of the woods and then over the stream via a wooden footbridge. 3. With only a bed and a chair, the room was almost 4. Whichever toys we buy for our mother and toddler club, they had better be strong as they have to survive the 5. treatment of fifteen young children twice weekly. Houses which have been poorly and cheaply built are less likely to earthquakes. ELS 297 Nineteen months later, she had a severe illness that left her blind and deaf. Her parents had hope for her. They had read Charles Dickens' report of the aid given to another blind and deaf girl, Laura Bridgman. When Helen was 6 years old, her parents took her to see Alexander Graham Bell, famed teacher of the deaf and inventor of the telephone. Until her death in 1936, she remained Helen's teacher and constant companion. Sullivan had been almost blind in early life, but her sight had been partially restored. Helen soon learnt the finger-tip, or manual, alphabet as well as Braille - a system of writing for blind people, using raised dots which can be read by touch. By placing her sensitive fingers on the lips and throat of her teachers, she felt their motions and learnt to hear them speak. Three years after mastering the manual alphabet, she learnt to speak herself. Once I knew only darkness^and stillness... . My life was without past or future... . But a little word from the fingers of another fell into my hand that clutched at emptiness, and my heart leapt to the rapture of living. This is how Helen Keller described the beginning of her new life when, despite blindness and deafness, she learnt to communicate with others. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as done with the hands j) put, placed, built, or made higher than its surrounding surface k) a very small round mark I) able to record or perceive small changes m) the front part of the neck n) action movement o) gain great skill in a subject, language, etc. p) the state of being without movement or sound q) hold tightly with hands r) jump s) the state of being extremely happy and pleased 298 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage one of the things which encouraged Helen's parents to think positively about their daughter's future was A) reports of Anne Mansfield Sullivan's successes with similar children B) an account by Charles Dickens of the assistance another blind and deaf girl received C) the way Alexander Graham Bell had partially recovered from blindness D) the invention of Braille by Alexander Graham Bell in 1887 E) that her deafness and blindness were only partial 2. Anne Mansfield Sullivan is described in the passage as Helen's teacher and A) the inventor of Braille B) faithful companion C) the subject of a report by Charles Dickens D) distant relative E) a student of Alexander Graham Bell 3. From the information in the passage, we know that Helen Adams Keller A) was overjoyed about being able to communicate with others B) was blind and deaf when she was born C) was almost blind when she was born but partially regained her sight later D) took a shorter time than most students to learn the manual alphabet E) was disappointed by the slow progress she made under the instruction of Sullivan 1. When he was released from the dark, filthy prison cell into the daylight, his heart filled with 2. In chickens and turkeys the Newcastle disease may be so that nearly all those in an infected flock die within three days before any signs of illness have even developed. 3. Now that both my mother and her sister have both lost their husbands, they have become close to each other, which is good as, that way, they don't feel so lonely. 4. Most cars in America have automatic gearboxes, but I prefer a gearshift, as I feel more in control when I change the gears myself. 5. It took her five years to Finnish and, shortly after she became fluent in the language, she was transferred to Taiwan. ELS 299 Young Daniel was brought up in the strict yet independent beliefs of the Dissenters. At 14 he was sent to a Dissenters' academy. In addition to the traditional Latin and Greek, he studied French, Italian, Spanish, and history and became especially well-educated in geography. He studied for the ministry, but instead of becoming a priest, in 1685 he went into business. Engaged in foreign trade, he visited France and lived in Spain for a time. Meanwhile he was writing and speculating financially, but Defoe was more interested in writing than in conducting business. His lively mind was taken up with problems of the day. In pamphlets, verse and periodicals, he called for reforms and advances in religious practices, economics, social welfare and politics. In his Essay on Projects , he suggested a national bank, as well as ideas to help reform bankruptcy laws, asylums and academies of learning. He stressed the need for tolerance, often using satire for emphasis. In 1702 he wrote a pamphlet titled The Shortest Way with Dissenters , satirizing the persecution of Dissenters. The government arrested him. After some months in prison, he was released through the influence of Robert Harley, a statesman who became his patron. In 1704, Defoe started The Review, a periodical. It was the first of many such periodicals with which Defoe was connected-forerunners of the modern newspaper. As people of that era did not care for fiction, Defoe wrote true histories of pirates and thieves, spicing facts with his own imagination. In 1719 he published Robinson Crusoe, which was drawn from the experiences and memoirs of a British sailor, Alexander Selkirk. *An English Protestant who dissents is some way from Church of England Dogma Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as