stories driven not by action, but by delicate changes in the emotions of the characters. 3. Mecca is visited by Muslims who every part of the world. 4. There are several species of monkeys who live in the forest and rarely come down to the ground. 5. The southward of the city into the countryside means that several villages have been swallowed up by urban sprawl. ELS 369 With the latter, the book itself as well as the archaeological excavations supporting it makes it reasonable to infer a real historical event as background. With the Odyssey, such an assumption is impossible. The book is a tale of adventure at sea and of homecoming after a long absence. These two themes have pervaded Western literature ever since the Homeric epic was written, and the story may well have proved a popular one well before Greek history began. The story could just as well have stood on its own without any relation to the conflict of the Greeks with Troy. The vividly fictional characteristics of the story have not prevented critics, past and present, from seeking to place it in a specific geographic context. Hesiod, who wrote later than Homer, believed that Odysseus and his ships sailed around in the general area of Italy and Sicily, to the west of Ithaca. Later analysts tried to set the wanderings within the Mediterranean Sea generally, while others suggested the Atlantic Ocean as more likely. The ancient astronomer Eratosthenes, who lived in the 2nd century BC, regarded all such speculations as foolish. For him, the world of Odysseus was a completely imaginary one. Indications of this are found within the text itself. Some of the hero's wanderings could well have been based on the even older story of Jason and his Argonauts, who sailed east in search of the golden fleece. To sum up, in the case of the Odyssey, it is quite likely that several ancient legends were woven into one continuous epic. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as ELS 370 \/prh\ Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the author of the passage, it is true to say of the Odyssey that A) it is far better written than the Iliad B) there are no good reasons for thinking it is based on true events C) Homer copied, almost word for word, an earlier book about Jason and his Argonauts D) it relies heavily on the events of the Trojan War E) it is just as believable as the Iliad 2. The author states that since ancient times, experts have A) all discounted the Mediterranean Sea as the scene of the events in the Odyssey B) agreed on where and when the events in the Odyssey took place C) all been sure that all the events in the Odyssey are totally fictitious D) been certain that Homer travelled across the Atlantic Ocean E) been trying to place the events in the Odyssey into a specific location 3. It is clear from the passage that the author believes the Odyssey A) doesn't include any of the earlier story of Jason and his Argonauts B) was inspired by real events which occurred during or after the Trojan War C) includes a wonderful story set around Sicily D) is actually a mixture of a number of previously existing tales E) wasn't actually written by Homer at all 1. The to American involvement in the Vietnam war was its fear of communism spreading through Southeast Asia. 2. The mass graves that were discovered were a/an of the horrors that had happened in the country. 3. Uncertainty still surrounds the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in 1963, but the general is that Lee Harvey Oswald, his assassin, was a lone gunman who acted from unknown personal motives. 4. Because the business has been successful and has grown considerably during the first year, it is 5. to assume that it should make a good profit next year. Firdawsi, perhaps the greatest of Persian poets, took 35 years to write Shah Nameh, a/an which details the history of the kings of Persia. ELS 371 It is one of the largest metro systems in the world, which is especially remarkable considering Madrid's population of less than four million. It is also one of the fastestgrowing in the world, rivalled only by Seoul's in South Korea the latest round of expansions, completed in the spring of 2003, have increased its length to 223 kilometres. Metro stations served as air raid shelters during the Spanish Civil War. Starting in the 1970s, it was sequentially greatly expanded to cope with the influx of population and urban sprawl from Madrid's economic ascendancy. A huge project in the late 1990s and early 2000s installed approximately 50 kilometres of new metro tunnels, including a direct connection between downtown Madrid and Barajas International Airport (Line 8), and service to outlying areas, including a huge 40-kilometre circuit called Metrosur (Line 12) serving Madrid's southern suburbs. Metrosur, the largest civil engineering project in Europe, opened on April 11, 2003. It includes 40.7 kilometres of tunnel and 28 new stations, including an interchange station and an additional station on Line 10, which connects it to the downtown area. Construction began in June 2000, and the whole circuit was completed in less than three years. It connects the towns of Getafe, Möstoles, Alcorcön, Fuenlabrada and Leganes. Madrid also has an extensive commuter train network operated by Rente, the national rail line, which is integrated with the metro network. Several commuter train transfer stations were included in Metrosur. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as . Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. From the author's statement, we can infer that the size of Madrid's metro system is A) quite big compared to its population B) much larger than Seoul's C) insufficient to serve the city properly D) being expanded all the time due to its huge population E) the oldest metro in Europe 2. According to the passage, the expansion of the Madrid metro was started during the 70s A) to connect downtown with the airport B) because of the bombing during the Civil War C) because of people moving to the city D) for use as air raid shelters E) because the airport was expanding 3. It is clear from the passage that Metrosur A) is the general name given to Madrid's metro system B) is designed to carry commuters during rush hour C) intersects another line D) was opened in the year 2000 E) is run by Rente, the national rail line 1. During World War II, the city of Coventry was the frequent target of German 2. The council has built a/an , which left large parts of the city completely destroyed. at my bus stop, which is great as now I don't get wet waiting for my bus. 3. Due to the sudden disaster, the management has promised us that extra nurses and doctors will be called in, but, in the meantime, we will have to this influx of patients as well as we can. 4. It should be more comfortable in the office this summer as a new air-conditioning system has been 5. Earl's Court and Olympia are the UK's top exhibition halls, only by the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham. ELS 373 He was both the 27th president and later, from 1921 to 1930, the chief justice of the US Supreme Court. Owing to Taft's long years of experience, he was the man best fitted to serve in both positions. He had been in public office almost continuously since 1881. He was the first civil governor of the Philippines and Secretary of War in President Theodore Roosevelt's Cabinet, these are only two of the many high positions he held. His large size and his famous chuckle made Taft a memorable figure. He was 5 feet 11 inches tall, with a fair complexion, clear blue eyes, and light hair. At the time he was president, he weighed 350 pounds. He joked about his bulk and took no offense at the jokes of others. Asked to accept a chair of law at Yale University, he replied that he would if they could make it a sofa of law . Chairs were indeed a problem for him. He always looked before he sat to avoid armchairs or antiques in which he might get stuck or which might collapse under his bulk. When he was governor of the Philippines, Taft made a trip into the mountains for the benefit of his health. He cabled Secretary of War Elihu Root Stood trip well. Rode horseback 25 miles to 5,000 feet elevation. Root cabled back Referring to your telegram ... how is the horse. His biographer, Henry F. Pringle, has described the Taft chuckle It was by all odds the most infectious chuckle in the history of politics. It started with a silent trembling of Taft's ample stomach. The next sign was a pause in the reading of his speech, and the spread of a slow grin across his face. Then came a kind of gulp which seemed to escape without his being aware that the climax was near. Laughter followed hard on the chuckle itself, and the audience invariably joined in. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as above sea level k) no doubt undeniably (phrase) I) vibration with short slight movement m) fairly large more than enough in size, extent or amount n) a stop or temporary interval in an action o) a smile with lips back, revealing the teeth p) a spasmodic reflex of the throat made as if in swallowing hasty or greedy swallow q) the highest point of any development r) the sound of expressing amusement or joy s) always consistently 374 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, William Howard Taft is an easily-remembered personality because of his A) trek up a mountain in the Philippines B) blond hair and blue eyes C) quiet laugh and his bulk D) quite interesting biography E) high positions in office 2. We learn from the passage that William H. Taft was unique in that A) no other man has ever served the US in its two most important posts B) he was not offended by the jokes about his size C) the US has never had such a huge president D) he received a huge number of votes to become the 27th president E) he was the only preseident of the US to have blond hair and blue eyes 3. According to the passage, William H. Taft's size A) made riding a horse impossible for him B) made him perfectly suited for government posts C) embarrassed him intensely D) sometimes made seating arrangements difficult E) made him very sensitive to personal comments 1. 2. Small numbers of Tibetan farmers live in the Karakoram mountain range, at of up to 4500 metres. 3. When he placed the engagement ring on her finger, her hand was uncontrollably. 4. We have six weeks to organize the conference, which should be 5. Stan was a great salesman. No matter how miserable he felt, he always greeted customers with a pleasant time. and a handshake. ELS 375 The corner grocer, the little dress shop, the locally-owned sandwich shop, the bakery, the dancing school, the beauty salon all are victims of the constantly shifting economy. They are, at times, replaced by other small businesses that temporarily fill the needs of the neighbourhood but frequently end up sharing the same fate of dissolution. More often, the market served by the small business is taken over by a large store or plant, frequently from a more distant place of operation. Typically, the customers of the corner grocery or bakery have already gone to the nationwide supermarket chain just down the street. The woman who runs the dress shop chooses fashions out of tune with the times and gets too old to keep the store open during the most convenient hours for shoppers, who then go off to the big department stores. It is increasingly difficult, apparently, for small businesses to succeed in our complex economic structure based, as it is, on small profit margins and tremendous sales volume. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a business f) not suitable not in agreement (phrase) g) difference between the cost of purchasing or producing something and the selling price (phrase) h) very great enormous 376 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The writer states that small businesses A) constantly replace other small businesses which have gone bankrupt B) are in keen competition among themselves C) are finding it harder and harder to keep up with current economic trends D) do not open at convenient times for shoppers E) are mostly found in the form of shops 2. One of the advantages of big department stores is that A) they are not run by women who are too old B) they stock the most fashionable clothes C) they are nationwide and can be found across the country D) they are open at times suitable for the customers E) they are unlikely to go into bankruptcy 3. The main trend in today's economy is A) to sell cheaply but in bulk B) to shop at supermarkets which are nationwide C) to operate from a place distant from the market D) to incorporate small businesses into larger ones E) to stock the most fashionable items 1. The play was a success - the theatre was packed every night. 2. Having travelled on the bus for several hours, much to our surprise, we only a few kilometres from where we'd started. 3. The old find it difficult to understand the young because of the attitudes in society in recent years. 4. That new, modern office block is completely with the more traditional buildings around it. 5. There aren't enough schools in the area to the population. ELS 377 Out there, big waves were thundering in, dimly seen white shapes that boomed and shouted and threw great handfuls of froth at us. Together we laughed for pure joy he a baby meeting for the first time the wild tumult of the ocean, I with the salt of half a lifetime of sea love in me. It was hardly a conventional way to entertain one so young, I suppose, but now, with Roger a little past his fourth birthday, we are continuing that sharing of adventures in the world of nature that we began in his infancy - a sharing based on having fun together rather than on teaching. I have made no conscious effort to name plants or animals or to explain to him, but have just expressed my own pleasure in what we see, as I would with an older person. I think the results have been good. We have let Roger share our enjoyment of things people frequently deny children because they are inconvenient or because they interfere with bedtime. We have searched the shore at night for ghost crabs, those sand-coloured, fleet-legged beings rarely glimpsed in daytime, our flashlight piercing the darkness with a yellow cone. We have sat in the dark living room before the window to watch the full moon riding lower and lower toward the far shore of the bay, setting all the water ablaze with silver flames. The memory of such scenes, photographed by his child's mind, will mean more to him in manhood, we feel, than the sleep he lost. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as liquid great happiness and contentment great deal of noise disturbance excitement standard accepted as normal land along the edge of the sea variety of a type of sea animal with a round shell, five pairs of legs with claws on the front pair it often moves sideways j) quick-moving able to run very fast k) light, powered by batteries, which is carried in the hand I) force a way into or through make a hole in m) shape with a circular base and smooth, curved sides narrowing to a point n) strongly on fire, or appearing to be very bright 378 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The writer states that children A) enjoy spending time with their aunts and uncles B) love watching the sea at night when it's stormy C) make no effort to find out the names of plants and animals D) are often not allowed to experience the same things as her nephew E) keep memories in their minds in the way adults keep photographs 2. The writer admits that the experience with her nephew when he was 20 months old A) was not one usually acceptable for such a young child B) should have been delayed until his fourth birthday C) did not provide much entertainment for a baby D) was foolish because the weather was so bad E) was, in fact, so that she could get her own pleasure from the sea 3. When sharing an experience with her nephew, the writer A) hopes he will discover the names of animals and plants B) is not aiming to teach him anything but to have a good time with him C) gets more pleasure than Roger does D) frequently chooses times which are inconvenient E) takes a lot of photographs for him to remember by 1. The feeling of a mother has after giving birth to a child is perhaps one of the most intense emotions imaginable. 2. When the batteries in our only died just as we reached the deepest depths of the cave, we knew that we were in serious trouble. 3. I'm not sure the manager will approve of that leather skirt. He prefers us to look more 4. The 5. I could on the top of my beer was about five centimetres thick. make out the outline of a house, but it was too dark to see clearly. ELS 379 Violence intensified on 4 May when a protest meeting began in Haymarket Square. During this meeting to denounce the events of the previous days, the police had just begun to clear out the crowd when someone threw a bomb, killing twelve people and wounding more than sixty. Policeman Mathias J. Degan was killed almost instantly and seven other policemen later died as a result of their injuries. Four of the protestors were also killed when the bomb went off and, in the panic that followed, the police fired into the crowd, killing one more person. Some of the speakers earlier in the day had been anarchists, and so the crime was supposed to have been committed by an anarchist, despite the fact that no evidence for such a link could be demonstrated. Although the bomb-thrower was never identified, eight men - mostly of German descent - who had been involved in organizing the rallies were accused of the crime and found guilty. Seven of the men were sentenced to death and the eighth was sentenced to fifteen years in prison by Judge Joseph Gary, in spite of a startling lack of evidence that any of them had had any role in the bombing at all. The sentencing sparked outrage in international labor circles, resulting in protests all around the world and, eventually, the beginning of the worldwide celebrations of 1 May as an international workers' day. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The original reason the workers in Chicago were upset was A) because there were too many German anarchists in the city B) that the police had begun shooting C) because they were not happy with their working hours D) because the rioters began fighting with the police E) that someone threw a bomb which killed several people 2. A) a bomb exploded, killing and injuring many B) some anarchists gave speeches at the meeting C) police started shooting at the protestors D) Judge Joseph Gary sentenced the anarchists to death E) people supposed that anarchists had thrown a bomb 3. According to the passage, the person who had started the riot A) was outraged at the sentence he received B) certainly was one of the German anarchists C) most likely was Mathias J. Degan D) was never actually discovered E) revealed a startling piece of evidence that proved his innocence 1. At the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago, a/an began when police and people protesting the Vietnam War started fighting. 2. Many of the people living on the southern outskirts of Chicago are of Irish and Polish 3. My sister me of breaking my parents' stereo while playing soccer in the house, but I wasn't even home at the time. 4. After the death, in 1975, of Spanish dictator Francisco Franco, the Basque separatist movement in the country 5. American president Ronald Reagan was quite badly during an assassination attempt on him by John Hinckley, Jr. in 1981. His mother did not send him to Athens until he was a young man able to lift a stone under which his father had put a sword and a pair of sandals. When Theseus arrived in Athens after many adventures, he found the city in deep mourning. It was again time to send to Minos, king of Crete, the yearly tribute of seven youths and seven maidens to be devoured by the Minotaur. This was a terrible monster, half-human and half-bull. Theseus offered himself as one of the victims, hoping that he would be able to slay the monster. When he reached Crete, Ariadne, the beautiful daughter of the king, fell in love with him. She aided him by giving him a sword, with which he killed the Minotaur, and a ball of thread, with which he was able to find his way out of the winding labyrinth where the monster was kept. Theseus had promised his father that if he succeeded in his quest, he would hoist white sails on his ship when he returned it had black sails when he left. He forgot his promise. King Aegeus, seeing the dark sails, thought his son was dead and jumped into the sea. The sea has since been called the Aegean in his honour. Theseus then became king of the Athenians. He united the village communities of the plain of Attica into a strong and powerful nation. Theseus was killed by treachery during a revolt of the Athenians. Later his memory was held in great reverence. At the battle of Marathon in 490 BC, many of the Athenians believed they saw his spirit leading them against the Persians. After the Persian Wars, the oracle at Delphi ordered the Athenians to find the grave of Theseus on the island of Skyros, where he had been killed, and to bring his bones back to Athens. The oracle's instructions were obeyed. In 469 BC, the supposed remains of Theseus were carried back to Athens. The tomb of the great hero became a place of refuge for the poor and oppressed people of the city. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 382 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the Greek legend described in the passage, the Aegean Sea A) was the harshest sea in ancient times B) used to be given tributes to make the gods happy C) was where Theseus killed the monster D) was named after the King of Athens E) used to resemble a winding labyrinth 2. It is clear from the passage that when Theseus first arrived in Athens, the people were sad because A) his father had been killed by treachery B) he had failed to kill the monster C) they were preparing to send fourteen people to be eaten by a monster D) the king had just committed suicide believing that his son had been killed E) Ariadne, the beautiful daughter of the king, would be given to the monster 3. According to the passage, Theseus's final burying place A) provided a safe place for those living in poverty B) was in the Aegean Sea C) was in a distant land D) was in a labyrinth on the island of Skyros E) is situated on the spot where the battle of Marathon was fought 1. According to the legend, Saint George a fire-breathing dragon, and killing the monster made him a hero among the people. 2. The fox was so hungry when he killed the chicken that he it in seconds. 3. During World War II, the Spanish artist Salvador Dali and his wife, Gala, took in the United States, but after the war, they returned to Spain. 4. When the wind picked up, we the sails and headed towards Bali at a high speed. 5. The adventurer was looking for the ancient Ark of the Covenant and his took him down the Nile and into Ethiopia. ELS 383 The greatest poet of Persia - now Iran - was Abu al-Qasem Mansur, who wrote under the name Firdawsi. He wrote the country's national epic, Book of Kings, in its final form. Of the man himself, little is known. The most reliable source of information is an account by a 12th-century poet, Nezami-ye 'Aruzi, who visited Firdawsi's native village of Tus and collected stories about him. Firdawsi was born about 935, the son of a wealthy landowner. It was to earn money for his daughter's dowry that he began the 35-year task of composing the Book of Kings, or Shah-nameh as it is called in Persian. The work, nearly 60,000 couplets long, was based on a prose work of the same name, itself a translation of a history of the kings of Persia from the most ancient times down to the reign of Khosrow II in the 7th century. When the poem was completed in 1010, Firdawsi presented it to Mahmud, the sultan of Ghanza, in the hope of being well paid for it. In this the poet was disappointed he considered his reward so paltry that he gave it away. This angered Mahmud, and Firdawsi fled to Herat, then to Mazanderan. Some years later, Mahmud tried to make amends to the poet by sending him a valuable amount of indigo. Unfortunately the shipment arrived at Tus on the same day that Firdawsi's body was being taken to the cemetery for burial. His daughter refused the award. The Book of Kings has remained one of the most popular works in the Persian language. Modern Iranians understand it easily because the language in which it was written bears a relationship to modern Persian - a relationship similar to that between Shakespearean English and contemporary English. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as m) n) o) that can be trusted or depended on a written or spoken report or description connected with the place of one's birth an amount of money or property, given by a bride's family to her husband put together in a musical or literary, etc., form two rhyming lines of poetry together worthless because small of no importance give someone something to apologize for injury, loss, bad behaviour, etc. (phrase) a deep blue dye obtained from the leaves of a plant an amount of goods transported an area of land used for burying dead people the ceremony taking place when a dead person is put into a grave the act of placing a dead body into the earth something - a prize, money, etc. - given as the result of an official decision possess something current present-day 384 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. From the information given in the passage, FirH-.vsi's Book of Kings could be described as A) an entirely fictional story about a mythical king of Persia B) a poem about Persian kings from Khosrow II to his own day C) a long poem based on an earlier historical account D) the life story of the sultan of Ghanza E) a translation into modern Iranian of an earlier Persian work 2. It is clear from the passage that Firdawsi wrote the poem A) to impress the sultan in the hope of being accepted at his court B) purely out of a love of history C) in order to raise money required for his daughter's marriage D) in a form of English quite similar to Shakespearean English E) not long before his sudden death 3. It is clear from the passage that A) Shakespeare and Firdawsi lived during the same time, but in different places B) eventually, Firdawsi managed to provide his daughter with a substantial dowry C) Firdawsi never returned to his native village of Tus after fleeing to Herat D) the language spoken in Iran hasn't changed dramatically since Firdawsi's time E) the style of writing used by Shakespeare strongly resembles that of Firdawsi The Portuguese gave the city of Bombay to England in 1661 as part of the transferred at the marriage of Catherine of Braganza to the English king Charles II. 2. Quebecois, the language of Quebec, is not identical to modern French, but it a strong resemblance to the French of earlier times, so French people can usually understand this language. 3. She made a lot of mistakes on her first day at the clothing factory and was only paid for completed articles. Her wages were so that she could barely afford a sandwich and her bus fare home. 4. She was presented with £1000 for winning the painting competition, and used the to decorate her studio. 5. Simone hasn't been back to her country, South Africa, for fifteen years. Although she was born and raised there, she now considers London her home. ELS 385 Such misconduct includes failure to exercise the level of skill and learning expected of a licensed professional. The result of malpractice to the client or patient is injury, damage or some loss owing to professional incompetence. The official criteria for a valid medical malpractice claim are duty, breach, damages and causation. The practitioner must have had a relationship to the patient, which indicates that he or she had a duty to exercise ordinary care must have breached - that is, failed to measure up to - that duty, according to the applicable standard of care and because of that breach must have caused the patient physical and monetary damages. If there is evidence of malpractice, a client may sue in a civil action, seeking damages in the form of money. Those most likely to be sued are surgeons, since malpractice is much easier to prove when a surgical operation has been done. If, for example, a surgeon leaves a foreign object inside a closed wound, the surgeon is clearly liable for the carelessness. Plastic surgeons are most at risk, since their operations are done to improve the patient's appearance. Dissatisfied patients may sue. Medical malpractice actions do three things provide quality control for the medical profession provide some measure of compensation for the harm done and give emotional vindication to the plaintiff, which is a measure of his or her ability to make a complaint and receive a satisfactory response. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as n) something that shows or proves the truth, justice, validity, etc., of something that has been disputed o) a person who brings a legal case against someone in a court of law 386 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Implied by the passage, of all professionals, those most frequently charged with malpractice are A) plastic surgeons B) law practitioners C) private accountants D) hospital staff E) licensed professionals 2. We can infer from the author's statement that A) professionals do not actually deserve to be sued by their clients B) clients must carry out a thorough search for the quality of the service they are promised C) there must have been incidences in which surgeons left foreign objects in closed wounds D) it is not possible to make people very beautiful through plastic surgery E) plastic surgeons are very often unable to change the appearance of their clients 3. It is clear from the details in the passage that in order to claim compensation, a client A) must be a licensed professional B) must look particularly ugly after plastic surgery C) must have had a written agreement with the professional D) must have paid insurance when purchasing the service E) must have been harmed economically or bodily You'd better find a/an excuse for your absence from the meeting, or you'll get into trouble with the manager. 2. In ancient Rome, every male citizen between the ages of 17 and 46 was for military duty, and in times of extreme emergency, all male citizens could be called up, even the young and the aged. 3. When they found the body buried in another man's garden, it was a total of Simon's innocence. 4. Interior designers help their furnish their homes and solve problems in the use of living space and furnishings. 5. John Grisham was a legal before he became a writer. ELS 387 The biologist Jacques Loeb showed early in the 20th century that the life span of the fruit fly was halved by every 10-degree rise in temperature. This led to impractical speculations about prolonging the human life span by experimenting with various degrees of cooling the body. Fairly severe restriction of caloric intake in the laboratory rat can more than double its life span, chiefly by prolonging the period of immaturity. Caloric restriction is so far the only factor shown to have a major effect on aging and lifespan. Unfortunately, food restriction has less effect on species other than rodents. It has not been shown that undernourished human populations live longer, but vitamin deficiency, disease, and poor medical care found in such groups complicate the analysis. In geriatric medicine, the hope is to eliminate the disease processes that prevent human beings from living to the end of their natural lifespan. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as not sensible in the real world unrealistic g) thoughts or guesses about what might happen h) make last longer i) quite somewhat j) limitation k) consumption I) the state of not being fully developed m) not getting enough food or healthy enough food n) a less than necessary amount o) relating to old age 388 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The passage tells us that the average length of time an animal species lives A) cannot be determined until the individual has died B) is more affected by environment than anything else C) always changes when its environment is modified D) can be planned by scientists who study genetics E) depends primarily on its genes, but can be affected by other factors 2. Experiments have demonstrated that underfed rats live longer, A) but only if they live in very cold places most of the time B) although they also appear to develop emotional problems C) though when their diet is devoid of carbohydrates and vitamins, but not proteins D) and the same appears to hold true for people and other mammals E) though this doesn't necessarily seem to be true for humans 3. Geriatric medicine aims to lengthen human life by A) getting rid of the diseases that shorten it B) creating medicine especially for old people C) encouraging people to live naturally D) restricting the individual's food consumption E) preventing the complications resulting from vitamin deficiency Sailors often used to suffer from scurvy, a disease caused by a/an of vitamin C, until ship captains learnt that including lemons in the sailors' diets corrected this problem, as all citrus fruits are good sources of the vitamin. 2. Of all living species, trees have the longest -the bristlecone pine of the western US, for example, has been known to live for over 4,000 years. 3. In the ancient Greek city states direct democracy, where everybody had a say in the city's affairs, worked well but in modern nations with millions of inhabitants it is totally 4. William was very intelligent, but as he was only 13 when he started university, he had a hard time because his emotional prevented him from making friends with his older classmates. 5. In order to save money and increase profits, the boss tried to the employees' holidays from four to two weeks, but the workers went on strike immediately and he had to reverse his decision. ELS 389 Universities were the next group to connect to the system. The Internet started to develop as a commercial system in the late 1980s, and by the mid-1990s, home users were starting to connect to the Internet in significant numbers. Internet usage is still growing quickly and the number of hours we spend online is rising sharply. The United States still leads the way in Internet usage, but Europe is catching up. It is difficult to predict anything in such a fast-growing area, but at the end of 1999, it was estimated that between 13 and 14 million people in the UK - about one-fifth of the population - had access to the Internet, while worldwide, at least 100 million people are connected to the system. E-mail is the simplest application of the Internet, but it is also the most popular with both businesses and personal users. Email is a straightforward and cost-effective way of communicating using Internet, falling somewhere between the phone and the fax in terms of formality and speed. E-mail is cheap and it only takes a few seconds for a message to reach the Internet. At the moment, the computer is the most common way people connect to the Internet, followed by mobile phones, but in the future, television sets will also have Internet capabilities. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as detailed study armed forces link up with join together broaden the potential or capabilities of something relating to business of considerable importance worthy of attention the way in which goods and services are used, or the amount of goods and services used close the gap between oneself and a competitor (phrasal verb) forecast make an approximate judgement, usually of number or amount total number of inhabitants private, relating to an individual presenting no complications direct conserving expenditure cheaper requirement by convention or custom for a degree of ceremony or elaborate procedures the quality of being able to do something 390 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, the Internet was first used A) by the American army to search for and analyize information B) to carry out research for the American universities C) to retrieve information through television screens D) by businesses to attract more customers E) by American households to send e-mail messages around the world 2. According to the figures in the passage, in 1999, A) 20% of British people had access to the Internet B) the Internet started to develop as a commercial tool C) the majority of businesses used e-mail as their main form of communication D) Europe caught America up in terms of number of people using the Internet E) 100 million British people used the Internet for e-mail messages 3. The author predicts that in the future A) everybody will be connected to the Internet B) e-mail messages won't take as long to send as they do now C) television sets will be used to connect to the Internet as well D) the military will make less use of the Internet E) universities will find new ways of using the Internet for both research and teaching 1. The total 2. The Rockefeller Foundation, which was founded by John D. Rockefeller with $1.6 million, conducts 3. of Istanbul is greater than that of the whole of New Zealand. to find solutions to hunger in developing nations. I have read the instructions on how to assemble our new barbecue and it seems quite to me. I can probably do it without much difficulty. 4. My daughter dropped behind in her class because of her illness, but she with her classmates quickly by studying hard after she had recovered. 5. Since their invention in 1901, the of vacuum cleaners in the home has steadily increased. ELS 391 The boy who was to become a great military leader and king of Prussia began his career hating the life of a soldier. Frederick II was born on January 24, 1712, in Berlin. His father was King Frederick William I. His mother was Princess Sophia Dorothea of Hanover, sister of George II of England. Frederick's father insisted on a practical, military education for his son. The boy preferred music, art and literature. He rebelled against tobacco, drinking and hunting, which his father believed were natural pleasures of royalty. The king forbid the prince's tutors to teach him Latin, but he studied it and the classics in secret. As Frederick became older, the relationship between father and son grew worse. Frederick's mother and his sister Wilhelmina sided with him against his father. This further enraged the stubborn king, who became more and more severe with his son, hitting him in public and even beating him with a cane in front of army troops. When Frederick was 18, he tried to escape the tyranny of his father by running away. Caught before he crossed the border, he was locked in solitary confinement for a time. From a window of his cell he was forced to watch the execution of his closest friend, who had accompanied him in his flight. After this incident, young Frederick was changed and became ruthless, crafty and cynical. Gradually the old king gave his son ever greater responsibilities. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as locked n) o) p) q) r) s) the official killing of someone go somewhere together with someone a fleeing from danger or oppression pitiless cruel cleverly deceitful skilful in deception believing that people are motivated in all their actions only by selfishness 392 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The passage tells us that the turning point in the change of Frederick ll's personality came when A) his tutors refused to teach him Latin B) his father beat him severely C) his closest friend was killed D) his father threatened to put him in prison E) he felt solitary away from his family 2. It's obvious from the passage that young Frederick A) liked creative subjects better than practical ones B) was too frail to become a king C) was tempted to become an artist by his tutor D) had no talents in anything other than in arts E) did not get on with any member of the royal family 3. The passage informs us that, despite his father's wishes, Frederick A) ordered the execution of his closest friend B) managed to escape Prussia accompanied by a friend C) finally had his father placed alone in a prison cell D) sided with his mother against his sister Wilhelmina E) learnt Latin and the classics secretly When Steven arrived at university he his strict moral upbringing by drinking heavily and chasing girls around. 2. After another man who frequented the bar was arrested for drug dealing, the police suspicious that the bar was the center of a drug smuggling operation. 3. My son is so that, once he has made up his mind about something, it is impossible to make him give up. 4. Whenever I argue with my brother, my sister him, which annoys me to no end. 5. He is very temperamental about his work and the slightest criticism him. Only last week he stormed out of the office when someone suggested an alteration to his plan. ELS 393 By making assumptions that are not contradicted by the behaviour of the observable universe, scientists build models, or theories, that attempt to describe the universe as a whole, including its origin and its future. They use each model until something is found that contradicts it. Then the model must be modified or discarded. Cosmologists usually assume that the universe, except for small irregularities, has an identical appearance to all observers - identical to the laws of physics - irrespective of where in the universe the observers are located. This unproven concept is called the cosmological principle. One consequence of the cosmological principle is that the universe cannot have an edge, for, otherwise, an observer near the edge would have a different view from that of someone near the centre. Thus, space must be infinite and evenly filled with matter, or, alternatively, the geometry of space must be such that all observers see themselves as at the centre. Also, astronomers believe that the only motion that can occur, except for small irregularities, is a uniform expansion or contraction of the universe. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as be gotten rid of g) believe something is true, despite not having any real proof h) regardless of (phrase) i) result j) the line where an object or place ends and another thing begins k) not varying all the same I) the act of getting bigger m) the act of getting smaller 394 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Cosmological models of the universe A) are based on unquestionable facts and are always extremely accurate B) are changed whenever new information shows them to be wrong C) show us exactly what the universe looks like from any perspective D) often contradict each other and cause much debate among scientists E) give us a clear and unchanging picture of the exact nature of the universe 2. One of the bases of the cosmological principle is that A) people who live near the edge of the universe see things in a very different way B) the universe is essentially an irregular body held together by a few common laws C) the Earth is at the centre of the universe, and thus, the most important thing D) contradictions to models of the universe are in violation of the laws of physics E) regardless of where a person may be, the universe looks much the same 3. Cosmologists believe that A) the infinite nature of the universe can be explained with geometry B) space is either endless or has some special geometric properties C) the universe, as we know it, is continually shrinking D) whatever the nature of the universe, our role in it doesn't really matter E) it's difficult to define the universe as it's constantly getting larger My father used to get very angry whenever we him, so it was always better to act as if we agreed with everything he said. 2. People used to believe that the world was flat and that anyone sailing too far would fall off its 3. A new system now allows people with cellular phones to make calls where they are - this is made possible by a network of satellites that provide coverage of the whole planet. 4. The process known as homogenization allows milk to be mixed when bought, unlike in the past, when the cream used to separate from the liquid and had to be mixed in by the consumer. 5. The president's questionable behaviour caused the parliament to make a/an into what he had been doing to see if his activities had broken any laws. ELS 395 The brilliant Japanese writer Yukio Mishima was a man torn between Japanese tradition and the westernization of his culture. He was born as Hiraoka Kimitake on January 14, 1925, in Tokyo, but as an adult, he published under the name Yukio Mishima. He attended Tokyo's Peers School and the University of Tokyo. Mishima's writing career took off with the 1949 publication of his first novel, Confessions of a Mask. A man of discipline and great energy, he usually wrote from midnight until dawn, and in his lifetime, produced more than 100 works, including novels, short stories, screenplays and traditional Japanese No and Kabuki plays. He even starred in a film version of his own short story, Patriotism . One of his best-known novels is The Temple of the Golden Pavilion, published in 1958. Although Mishima enjoyed many benefits from the westernization of Japan, he was troubled by the changes wrought on traditional Japanese ways, which was a common theme in his stories. His last work, Sea of Fertility, compares modern Japan to the barren landscape of the moon. In an effort to recapture the samurai tradition, Mishima organized a private army called the Shield Society. On November 25, 1970, Mishima and four society members took control of an office at military headquarters in Tokyo. He gave a speech attacking Japan's post-World War II constitution and then committed suicide. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as e) an admission or acknowledgement, especially of one's faults, misdeeds or crimes f) the script for a film, including instructions for sets g) devotion to one's own nation h) building used for worship i) a decorative shelter j) worked into impressed upon shaped by k) expanded topic or idea developed throughout a work of art i) the ability of sustaining abundant growth or life m) unable to support growth or life n) area of land seen in one view extensive area with particular characteristics o) renew or repeat p) the system of fundamental principles according to which a state is governed 396 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage, 1. It is clear from the passage that Yukio Mishima A) fought in World War II as a samurai B) was interested in space exploration, particularly of the moon C) was engaged in many things simultaneously D) wrote brilliant books, but not in large numbers E) was a better writer than an actor 2. In his description of Yukio Mishima, the author seems to imply that Mishima A) lived a western-style life B) was not successful as a samurai C) was not normal mentally D) was ashamed of his original name E) was a man of contrasts 3. We learn from the passage that the point commonly depicted in Mishima's books was A) how to get rid of the negative aspects of Japanese tradition B) how Japan could benefit from westernization C) the importance of building an army of samurai D) the necessity of a traditional literary group E) the degeneration of Japanese traditions The career of jazz composer and pianist Duke Ellington - perhaps the greatest American composer - really when he and his big band got a steady job performing at Harlem's Cotton Club in 1927. 2. Such events as the Football World Cup or the Olympics allow the Brazilian people to display their 3. , which they usually do with great spirit and humour. Despite huge investments from central government, the villagers of the Welsh valleys found it difficult to adapt to the changes on their community by the closure of all Welsh coal mines. 4. The basic of most James Bond films is that an evil organization is trying to carry out a sinister plot of some kind, but is prevented from doing so by the hero. 5. Few parts of the desert are entirely Where water seeps toward the surface, a great variety of plants grow, and after a rain, low shrubs and grasses come to life. ELS 397 Most surprising among the findings were the contents found within the tombs of females. The women had been buried along with swords, daggers, bows and arrows, leading many of the archaeologists to the preliminary conclusion that at least some of the female members of the Sauromatian and Sarmation nomadic tribes, to which the tombs had been traced, served as warriors. One of the most provocative graves was that of a bowlegged young woman who had been buried with a dagger and a quiver containing 40 bronze-tipped arrows. The woman's bowed legs, combined with the armaments at her side, seemed to indicate that she was trained both in horseback riding and archery and was perhaps skilled in the practice of mounted warfare. Some observers suggested that the women warriors bore some relation to the mythical Amazons, powerful female warriors of whom the Greek historian Herodotus had written. Archaeologists involved with the excavation stated that any connection between the entombed women and the legendary Amazons was largely speculative. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as box c) a weapon consisting of a long, sharp blade with a handle d) a short pointed weapon used for stabbing e) a weapon made of bent wood and string that is used to shoot an arrow f) first earliest g) a judgement or opinion obtained by reasoning h) (of groups of people) having no permanent home but moving about from place to place, usually seasonally i) initiating an emotional reaction j) having legs curving outwards at or below the knee k) a case for carrying arrows I) weapons fighting equipment m) the art of shooting arrows accurately n) on horseback o) have a connection with (phrase) p) concluded from incomplete evidence guessed 398 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Archaeologists who carried out the excavations A) B) were unable to explain some of the fighting equipment found in the tombs made the conclusion that the Sauromatian and Sarmation nomadic tribes had women warriors rather than men C) were not sure whether the entombed women belonged to a nomadic tribe or to the Amazons D) did not accept any association between the entombed women and the Amazons E) made use of the works of the Greek historian Herodotus before they started excavating 2. It is stated in the passage that it is possible that the young woman described A) was buried by her warrior husband's side B) had taken part in fighting on horseback C) was one of the mythical Amazons D) made bronze-tipped arrows for a living E) was written about by Herodotus 3. It is understood from the passage that the tombs A) all belonged to women warriors B) took quite a long time to be excavated C) were at least 600 years old D) included nothing apart from fighting equipment E) were built within close distance to each other 1. The 2. We carried out a/an at Wroxeter in England uncovered a complete Roman city. survey using one hundred questionnaires in preparation for a full scale national market study. 3. Theories that Marilyn Monroe was murdered are purely as there is nothing to suggest that she didn't take her own life. 4. Canada has a special police force of officers who wear a distinctive red uniform. Riding enables them to reach remote houses in the Canadian wilderness. 5. The police officer asked the suspect to empty the of his pockets out onto the table. ELS 399 He led the Brazilian national soccer team to three World Cup victories in 1958, 1962 and 1970, and to permanent possession of the Jules Rimet Trophy. Edson Arantes do Nascimento was born to a poor family on October 23, 1940, in Tres Coracoes, Brazil. He began playing for a local minor-league club when he was a teenager. He made his debut with the Santos Football Club in 1956. With Pele at inside left forward, the team won several South American clubs' cups and the 1962 world club championship. Pele scored his 1,000th goal in 1969. The legendary athlete retired in 1974 but made a comeback in 1975, reportedly after accepting a $7-million contract for three years with the New York Cosmos of the North American Soccer League. He said he came out of retirement, not for the money, but to make soccer truly popular in the United States. His farewell appearance was against his old Santos club in 1977. Pele, whose nickname does not mean anything, became a Brazilian national hero and was also known as Perola Negra, meaning Black Pearl. An average-sized man, he was blessed with speed, great balance, tremendous vision, the ability to control the ball superbly and the ability to shoot powerfully and accurately with either foot as well as with his head. In his career he played in 1,363 matches and scored 1,281 goals. His best season was 1958, when he scored 139 times. In addition to his accomplishments in sports, he published several best-selling autobiographies, starred in several documentary and semi-documentary films, and composed numerous musical pieces, including the entire sound track for the 1977 film Pele . He was the 1978 recipient of the International Peace Award, and in 1980, he was named athlete of the century. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as unspoiled without anything added to it success in a struggle, a war or a competition for all time the first public performance of a singer, musician, football player or other performer e) get a goal or point in a game f) the act of becoming popular or successful again g) be said (by someone) to be true h) the act of leaving performed by someone who is leaving a career i) an informal name for someone j) someone or something not very large or very small k) have, as a natural or God-given gift, a particular good quality or skill I) very great in amount or strength m) very well indeed excellently n) performed without making any mistakes o) something remarkable that has been done or achieved p) the person that receives something 400 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. It is clear from the passage that until 1975 A) Pele had played for several North American teams B) Pele had already earned about 7 million dollars C) no other sportsman had been paid as much as Pele D) soccer was the most popular sport in North America E) Pele had already composed a few musical pieces 2. According to the passage, Pele A) last played for Santos Football Club in 1977 B) had had a privileged childhood C) scored exactly 1000 goals in his career D) preferred to lead a tranquil life upon his retirement E) first played for Santos Football Club at the age of sixteen 3. We understand from the passage that Pele A) was as good an actor as he was a soccer player B) was highly regarded internationally C) performed best in his homeland of Brazil D) was never satisfied with how much money he was paid E) returned to his career in order to obtain a huge sum of money 1. The former pop star made his acting in a mid-week drama called Eastenders and soon became a popular actor. 2. The notoriously badly-behaved snooker champion Alex Higgins had the Hurricane Higgins . 3. Rather than buy a small car, which wouldn't have been very comfortable, or spending a lot of money on a large luxury model, we bought a/an family, four-door sedan. 4. The ex-US President Jimmy Carter was the of the 2002 Nobel Peace Prize. 5. An African-American female born into poverty in the South, Oprah Winfrey's extraordinary as the most successful woman in entertainment in America are amazing by any standards. ELS 401 It is a 446-kilometre gorge cut through high plateaus by the Colorado River. It is noted for its fantastic shapes and colours. Within the walls of the canyon stand imposing peaks, canyons and ravines. In general, the colour of the canyon is red, but each layer or group of layers has a distinctive hue - buff and gray,