denetler. Neden birbirimize bu kadar çok benzediğimizi de açıklamaya yarar. Evrim sizin çok farklı olmanıza asla izin vermeyecektir, yeni bir türe dönüşmediğiniz takdirde tabii. Altı milyar genomumuz var. Hepimiz yüzde 99,9 oranında aynıyız, ama öte yandan, biyokimyacı David Cox'un sözleriyle tüm insanların hiçbir ortak yönleri bulunmadığını da söyleyebilir ve sonuna kadar haklı olursunuz. DNA'mızın çoğu kendini size değil kendine adamıştır O sizin çoğalmanızı sağlayan bir makine değil, siz onun çoğalmasını sağlayan bir makinesiniz. … insan genlerinin neredeyse yarısı kendi kendini kopyalamak dışında hiçbir şey yapmaz. Tüm organizmalar bir bakıma genlerinin kölesidir Som balıklarının, örümceklerin ve başka sayısız yaratığın çiftleşme sürecinde ölmeye hazır olmasının sebebi de budur. Üreme ve genlerini aktarma arzusu doğadaki en güçlü dürtüdür. Sherwin B. Nuland'ın ifadesiyle İmparatorluklar çöker, idler patlar, büyük senfoniler yazılır ve hepsinin arkasında, doyurulmak isteyen tek bir içgüdü vardır. Evrimsel açıdan bakıldığında seks, bizi genetik malzememizi aktarmaya teşvik eden bir ödül mekanizmasından ibarettir aslında. Her alanda emek veren araştırmacılar, hangi organizma üzerinde çalışırlarsa çalışsınlar, ister iplik solucanı, ister insan her canlıda temelde aynı genleri incelemekte olduklarını anladılar. Yaşam, görünüşe bakılırsa, tek bir mavi kopyadan çoğaltılmıştı. Hepsi de tek bir döllenmiş yumurtadan doğan ve tıpatıp aynı DNA'yı taşıyan milyarlarca embriyo hücresi nereye gideceğini ve ne yapacağını nasıl bilir. Hangisinin bir karaciğer hücresi, hangisinin elastik bir sinir hücresi, hangisinin bir kan kabarcığı ve hangisinin çırpan bir kanat üstündeki pırıltı kırıntısı olması gerektiğini nereden anlar. Onlara talimat veren şey hox-genleridir. Hox genleri bunu tüm organizmalar için aşağı yukarı aynı şekilde yapar. Bizim kırk altı kromozomumuz vardır, halbuki bazı eğrelti otları altı yüzden fazla kromozoma sahiptir. Demek ki, önemli olan kaç gene sahip olduğunuz değil, genlerinizi nasıl kullandığınız. Ne yazık ki, birbirinden bağımsız çalışan 35.000 gen, yetkin bir insanoğlunu oluşturan türden fiziksel kompleksliği üretmeye asla yetmez. İşte bu yüzden, genlerin işbirliği yapması gerektiği çok açıktır. Hemofili, Parkinson, Huntington ve kistik fibrosis gibi birkaç hastalığa belli bazı disfonksiyonel genler sebep olur, ama ekseriyetle, yıkıcı genler bir türe ya da nüfusa kalıcı biçimde musallat olmaya fırsat bulamadan doğal seçme tarafından ayıklanır. Kaderimiz sağlığımız ve hatta göz rengimiz, belirli genler tarafından değil çoğunlukla birlikte çalışan gen grupları tarafından belirlenir. Genom, insan vücudunun parça listesi gibi Bize neden yapılmış olduğumuzu söyler, ama nasıl çalıştığımız konusunda hiçbir açıklamada bulunmaz. Ve şimdiki hedefimiz insan proteomunu de şifre etmek. Bu öyle yeni bir kavram ki, on sene önce proteom diye bir terim bile yoktu. Proteom, proteinleri yaratan bilgi kütüphanesidir. Proteinler, hatırlarsanız, tüm canlı sistemlerin beygirleridir. Her an her hücrede yüz milyon kadar protein işbaşında olabilir. Onları harekete geçirmek genellikle çok kolaydır. İçtiğiniz bir bardak şarap dahi, Scientific American'ın belirttiği gibi, sisteminizdeki protein sayısını ve çeşitlerini önemli ölçüde değiştirmeye yeter. … E. coli bakterisi için geçerli olan her şey filler için de geçerli olmalı, hatta daha da geçerli. Her canlı varlık, aynı orijinal planın dikkatle işlenmiş bir çeşitlemesidir. İnsanlar olarak yalnızca nicelik farklılıklarından ibaretiz. … Ne gariptir ki, sebze ve meyvelerle bile yakın akrabayız. Bir muzun içinde olup biten kimyasal fonksiyonların neredeyse yarısı, sizin içinizde olup biten kimyasal fonksiyonlarla temelde aynıdır. Şunu ne kadar tekrarlasak az Bütün canlılar birdir. Bu cümle, gelmiş geçmiş en derin gerçektir ve galiba sonsuza dek öyle kalacaktır. VI. Bize Giden Yol Buz Devri 1815'te Endonezya'daki Sumbawa Adası'nda, görkemli Tambora Dağı'nın … patlaması … İki yüz kırk kilometreküp kül, toz ve kum dumanı atmosfere karışıp güneş ışınlarını bloke etmiş ve Yerküre'nin soğumasına neden olmuştu. … Bahar hiç gelmedi, yazın hava hiç ısınmadı. 1816 yazsız sene oldu. Ekinler her yerde sararıp, soldu. … Her şeye rağmen küresel sıcaklık yalnızca 1 santigrat derece düştü. … son derece yüksek standartlı bir yapıt olarak kabul görmeye başladı. Sonradan Croll'un bir akademisyen değil, bir hademe olduğu ortaya çıkınca, biraz şaşkınlık ve belki biraz da utanç yaşandı tabii. … Yerküre yörüngesinin şeklindeki periyodik değişimlerin (yörüngenin eliptik, yani oval imsi iken neredeyse dairesel bir şekil almasının ve sonra yeniden eliptikleşmesinin) buzul çağlarının başlayış ve bitişlerini açıklayabileceğini öne süren ilk kişiydi. Ekvator civarı dahil hemen her yerde buzullara alamet eden kanıtlar bulmaya başlamıştı. Buz katmanlarının oluşum sebebi ille de yağan karın miktarı değil, miktarı ne kadar az olursa olsun, karın yağdığı yerde kaldığı gerçeğidir. Sıcaklığın mevsim normallerinin altında seyrettiği tek bir yazın bile bir buzul çağını başlatabileceği düşünülüyor. Gerçek şu ki, bugün halen bir buzul çağı yaşadığımız söylenebilir. Tarihinin büyük bölümü boyunca, yani oldukça yakın bir geçmişe kadar Yerküre hiçbir yerde buz barındırmayacak ölçüde sıcak olma eğilimindeydi. İçinde bulunduğumuz buzul çağı (buzul bölümü hatta) yaklaşık kırk milyon yıl önce başladı ve kah öldürücü derecede fena kah hiç fena olmayan dönemler içerdi. İçinde bulunduğumuz buzul çağının sık sık itham edilen iki sorumlusu, Himalayaların yükselişi ve Panama Kıstağı'nın oluşumudur. Bunlardan birincisi hava akımlarını, ikincisiyse okyanus akıntılarını bozdu. Bir zamanlar bir ada olan Hindistan son kırk beş milyon yıldır Asya kara kütlesinin içine doğru 2.000 kilometre sokularak yalnızca Himalayaları değil, arkasındaki Tibet platosunu da yükseltti. Hipoteze göre, yükselen coğrafya havayı serinletmekle kalmadı, rüzgarları saptırıp Kuzey Amerika'ya doğru esmelerine yol açarak bu bölgenin uzun süreli soğuklara maruziyetini artırdı. Sonra, yaklaşık beş milyon yıl öncesinden itibaren, Panama denizden yükseldi ve kuzey ile Güney Amerika arasındaki boşluğu kapatıp Pasifik'le Atlantik arasındaki ılıklaştırıcı akıntıların dolaşımını bozarak, dünyanın en az yarısının yağış kalıplarını değiştirdi. Bu değişimin sonuçlarından biri Afrika'nın kuruması oldu ve bu da maymunların ağaçlardan inip, yeni oluşan savanlarda yeni bir yaşam tarzı aramalarına yol açtı. Eğer Yerküre tamamen donduysa, … nasıl olup da yeniden ısınabildi. … Yardım belki de dünyamızın eriyik haldeki içinden geldi … Yani kurtarıcımız volkanlar oldu Buza gömülü yüzeyi kırıp dışarı fışkırdılar, muazzam miktarlarda ısı ve gaz pompalayarak karları eritip atmosferi yeniden oluşturdular. Ne ilginçtir ki, bu hiper soğuk dönemin sonuna damgasını vuran olay Kambriyen patlamadır yaşam tarihinin ilkbaharı yani. Uzunca bir müddet, buzul çağlarına yüz binlerce yıl süren aşamalarla yavaş yavaş girip çıktığımız düşünüldü, ama artık bunun böyle olmadığını biliyoruz. Grönland'dan temin edilen buz çekirdekleri sayesinde, yüz bin yılı aşkın bir süreyi kapsayan ayrıntılı bir iklim kaydımız var ve bu kaydın çizdiği tablo hiç de iç açıcı değil Yerküre'nin, yakın tarihinin büyük bölümü boyunca uygarlıklarca algılanan istikrarlı ve durgun gezegenle hiç alakası olmadığını, bir ısınıp bir soğuyan iklim dönemlerine sık sık girip çıktığını gösteriyor. Esrarengiz İki Ayaklı * eksik halka insanımsı maymunlarla insanlar arasındaki geçiş formu olduğu varsayılan hayvan… Huxley, söz konusu askerin ölümcül bir yara almış olmasına karşın uçurumdan yukarıya on sekiz metre tırmanmış, giysilerini çıkarıp özel eşyalarından kurtulmuş, mağara girişini sıkı sıkı kapamış ve kendi kendini yarım metre toprağa gömmüş olmasını son derece çarpıcı bulduğunu alayla ifade etti. Neandertal'in fırlak alın çıkıntısına kafa yoran bir diğer antropolog, bu çıkıntının yanlış kaynamış bir ön kol kırığının acısı yüzünden uzun süre kaş çatmaktan ileri geldiğini savundu. (Otoriteler, ilk insanlar fikrini reddetmeye can attıklarından, genellikle en mantıkdışı olasılıkları bile benimsemeye razıydılar. İskelet ilk CiroMangon İnsanlarından birine aitti aslında.) Kemik çabucak Cava İnsanı olarak benimsendi. Bugün onu Homo erectus diye tanıyoruz. Dart, Taung kafatasının Dubois'ın Cava İnsanı gibi Homo erectus'a değil daha eski, daha maymunumsu bir yaratığa ait olduğunu bir bakışta anladı. Yaşını iki milyon yıl olarak belirledi. Bu konuları hükme bağlayan merkezi bir otorite yok. Bir isim ancak genel mutabakat sağlandığı takdirde kabul görüyor, o da pek sağlanamıyor zaten. Sorunun büyük bölümü, paradoksal görünse de kanıt kıtlığından kaynaklanıyor. Oysa insanın tarih öncesi hakkında anlayabildiklerimizin tamamı, bu birkaç milyar varlıktan belki en fazla beş bin tanesinin çoğunlukla un ufak olmuş kalıntılarına dayanıyor. İnsanlar Hominidae familyasına dahil edilmiştir. Hominidae maymunu süperfamilyasının adıdır ve bizi de kapsar. Yani neredeyse bir milyon yıllık bir gedik var arada. … Bütün türlerin tarihlerini işte böyle bölük pörcük parçalardan çıkarmaya, çalışıyoruz. İğneyle kuyu kazmak gibi bir şey bu. Birçok eski tür arasındaki ilişkiler hakkında aslında çok az fikrimiz var. Hangileri sonunda bize evrimleşti ve hangileri evrimin çıkmazları olarak kaldı. Bazıları muhtemelen ayni türler olarak görülmeyi bile hak etmiyor. Doğruluğundan emin olunabilecek veriler bu kadar azken bilim adamları yakın çevrede bulunmuş başka objeleri temel alan varsayımlar üretmeye çoğunlukla mecbur kalırlar ve bunlar da cesur tahminler olmaktan öteye gitmeyebilir. Yeni kanıtlara dair ilk yorumların çoğu zaman bulucusunun önyargılarını doğrular nitelikte olması fevkalade ilginçtir. İnsanın tarih öncesi hakkında, bir tarih öncemizin muhakkak var olduğu gerçeği dışında, bir yerlerde birilerinin itirazıyla karşılaşmadan söylenebilecek çok az şey var. Bunu aklımızda tutarak özetlersek, kim olduğumuz ve nereden geldiğimiz hakkında bildiğimizi sandığımız tek şey kabaca şundan ibarettir Organizmalar olarak tarihimizin ilk yüzde 99,99999'u süresince, şempanzelerle aynı soyu paylaştık. Şempanzelerin tarih öncesi hakkında bilinenler yok denecek kadar azdır, ama onlar o zaman neydiyse ler, bizler de oyduk. Derken, yaklaşık yedi milyon yıl önce çok önemli bir şey oldu. Afrika'nın tropik ormanlarında yeni bir canlı topluluğu ortaya çıkıp, açık savanlarda dolanmaya başladı. Bunlar Australopithecus'lardı ve sonraki beş milyon yıl boyunca dünyanın dominant insansı türleri olacaklardı. … ama hepsi de iki ayak üstünde yürüyebiliyordu. Dünyanın en meşhur insansı kalıntıları, 1974'te Donald Johanson liderliğindeki bir ekip tarafından Etiyopya'daki Hadar'da bulunan 3,18 milyon yıllık bir Australopithecus'a ait olanlardır. … Bu iskelet herkesçe Lucy olarak tanınıp benimsendi. Lucy ufacık tefecik bir şeydi Yalnızca bir metre boyundaydı. Yürüyebiliyordu, ama bunu ne kadar iyi yaptığı ayrı bir tartışma konusudur. İnsan vücudunda 206 kemik vardır, ama bunlardan birçoğu birbirine eştir. Eğer bir örneğin sol kalça kemiği elinizdeyse, boyutlarını bilmek için sağ eşine ihtiyacınız yoktur. Bütün gereksiz kemikleri çıkarırsanız, geriye toplam 120 kemik kalır, yani yarı-iskelet denilen şey. … Johanson onu neşeyle yanıtlayarak, el ve ayaklardaki 106 kemiği hesaba katmadığını söyler. Bunlar vücuttaki toplam kemik sayısının yarısından fazladır. Üstelik, Lucy'nin en tanımlayıcı özelliğinin değişim halindeki bir dünyayla başa çıkabilmek için el ve ayaklarını kullanması olduğu düşünülürse, oldukça önemli bir yandır bu. New-York'taki Amerikan Doğa Tarihi Müzesi'nde, bu iki Australopithecus'un küllerin üzerinden geçiş anını temsil eden bir dioraması vardı. … Bu dioramayı yeniden yapacak olsaydım, sanırım onları birazcık daha maymunumsu ve daha az insani yapardım. Bu yaratıklar insan değildi. İki ayaklı maymunlardı onlar. Lucy'nin ve soydaşlarının, hareket kabiliyeti açısından modern insanlarla alakası yoktu. diye diretir Tattersall. Bu insansılar ancak ağaçlı habitatlar arasında gidip gelmek zorunda kaldıkları zaman gayri ihtiyari olarak iki ayak üzerinde yürüyorlardı, bunu yapmaya onları kendi anatomileri zorluyordu. Johanson bunu kabul etmez. Lucy'nin kalçaları ve leğen kemiğinin adale düzeni, diye yazmıştır, ağaçlara tırmanmayı modern insanlar için olduğu kadar Lucy için de zorlaştırırdı. … yaklaşık 7 milyon yıllık bir insansıyı gün ışığına çıkarttı ve onu Sahelanthropus tchadensis olarak adlandırdı (Bazı eleştirmenler onun insan değil, bir erken maymun olduğuna dolayısıyla Sahelpithecus diye adlandırılması gerektiğine inanır.) Bunların hepsi de erken yaratıklardı ve oldukça ilkeldiler, ama iki ayak üstünde yürüyorlardı. Ve bunu yapmaya daha önce zannedildiğinden çok daha erken başlamışlardı. Bipedalizm (iki ayakla yürüme), talepkar ve riskli bir stratejidir. Leğen kemiğinin yeniden şekillenerek tam bir yük taşıma aracına dönüşmesini gerektirir. Gereken gücün muhafazası için, doğum kanalı nispeten dar olmak zorundadır. Bunun derhal ortaya çıkan iki önemli neticesi ve uzun vadeli bir diğer neticesi daha vardır. Birincisi, anneye doğum sırasında büyük acı verir ve hem anne için hem de bebek için ölüm riskini büyük ölçüde artırır. İkincisi, bebeğin kafasının böylesine dar bir aralıktan geçebilmesi için, beyni hayli küçükken ve dolayısıyla hala acizken doğması icap eder. Yani uzun süre bakıma muhtaç olacaktır. Bu da erkekle dişi arasında sağlam bir bağlılığı şart kılar. O halde Lucy ve soydaşları ağaçlardan neden indiler ve ormanlardan neden çıktılar. Belki de başka çareleri yoktu. Beynin mutlak büyüklüğü size her şeyi anlatmaz . Önemli olan, beynin göreceli boyutudur. Adını sıralayabileceğiniz hemen her büyük hayvan bizden daha güçlü, daha hızlı ve daha dişlidir. Saldırıyla karşılaştığımız modern insanlar olarak yalnızca iki avantajdan yararlanırız Güçlü bir beynimiz vardır, onu kullanarak stratejiler planlayabiliriz. Bir de karşımızdakinin canını yakacak nesneler fırlatabilmemizi sağlayan ellere sahibiz. Öyle anlaşılıyor ki, üç milyon yıl öncesiyle iki milyon yıl öncesi arasında bir noktada, aynı anda Afrika'da yaşayan belki altı tip insansı vardı. Ama neslini sürdürmek bunlardan ancak birine nasip olacaktı yaklaşık iki milyon yıl önce adeta bir sis perdesinin içinden çıkagelen Homo'ya. Belki de diye öneriyor Matt Ridley, onları biz yemişizdir. Bildiğimiz kadarıyla, insan beyinlerinin neden büyüdüğünü açıklayan hiçbir zorlayıcı sebep yok, diyor Tattersall. Büyük beyinler talepkar organlardır Vücut kütlesinin yalnızca yüzde 2'sini oluşturur ama enerjisinin yüzde 20'sini bir çırpıda tüketirler. Yakıt olarak kullandıkları maddeler konusunda da nispeten seçicidirler. Bir daha ağzınıza hiç yağ koymasanız mesela, beyniniz bundan şikayetçi olmaz, çünkü yağa zaten elini sürmez. Diğer organlara kazık atmak pahasına, bol bol glikoz ister. İnsanlar için kabulü en zor fikirlerden biri de, diyor, bizim hiçbir şeyin zirvesi olmadığımızdır. Bugün burada oluşumuzun kaçınılmaz olan hiçbir yanı yoktur. Evrimi neticede bizi üretmek üzere programlanmış bir süreç olarak düşünmeye eğilimli olmamız, kısmen insanlık kibrimizden kaynaklanır. Her insansı türü, gelişim bayrağını bir yere kadar taşıdıktan sonra daha genç ve taze bir koşucuya teslim etmişti. Oysa şimdi, bu erken formlardan birçoğunun hiçbir yere ulaşmayan tali yollar izlediğine kesin gözüyle bakılıyor. Ne şanslıyız ki, içlerinden biri doğru yolu bulmayı başardı Alet kullanan bir gruptu bu. Adeta gökten zembille inmiş ve hakkında çok tartışılan gizemli Homo habilis'le çakışmıştı. Bu yaratık Homo erectus'tu. … neredeyse eksiksiz bir Homo erectus iskeleti bulunca hayretler içinde kaldılar. 1,54 milyon yıl önce ölmüş, dokuz ila on iki yaşlarında bir erkek çocuğuydu bu. Bu da bize, her şeyden önce, Homo- erectus'un et yediğini gösteriyordu. Üstelik demek ki biri ona bakmıştı. İnsansı evriminde şefkatin gün ışığına çıkan ilk göstergesiydi bu. Homo erectus'lara ait kafataslarının bir Broca alanı içerdiği de keşfedildi. Broca alanı, beynin ön lopunda bulunan, konuşma yetisiyle alakalı bölgedir. Kesin olan tek şey, bir milyon yılı hayli aşkın bir süre önce, yeni, nispeten modern, iki ayak üstünde yürüyen insansıların Afrika'dan ayrılıp, yerkürenin dört bir yanına cesurca dağılmış oldukları. … gelişimini tamamlamış modern insana kadar, beş milyon yıldır devam eden bütün bu evrimsel süreç, yüzde 98,4'ü genetik olarak hala modern şempanzeden ayırt edilemeyen bir yaratık üretti. Yani bir zebrayla bir at arasındaki ya da bir yunusla bir musur arasındaki fark, uzak atalarınızın dünyayı ele geçirmek üzere yola çıktıkları zaman geride bıraktıkları tüylü yaratıklarla sizin aranızdaki farktan daha büyüktür. Yerinde Duramayan Maymun … okyanus yolculuğuna uygun tekneler yapıp, ada kıtalarda kolonileşmek için gereken türden işbirlikçi icraatlara girişmek şöyle dursun, 60.000 yıl önce insanların konuşabildiğini bile gösteren hiçbir kanıta rastlanmamıştır. … antropologlar Papua Yeni Gine'ye ilk gittiklerinde iç kesimlerin yüksek bölgelerinde tatlı patates yetiştiren insanlar bulduklarını biliyor muydunuz. … Tatlı patates de Güney Amerika'ya mahsus bir sebzedir. … kesin olan şu ki, insanlar geleneksel kuramların öngördüğünden çok daha uzun zamandır hatırı sayılır bir cüretle dolaşıyorlar yeryüzünde. Bilgilerini olduğu kadar genlerini de paylaştıkları muhakkak. Irak'la Vietnam arasındaki yaklaşık 5.000 kilometrelik mesafe içinde, biri Hindistan'daki o tek fosil, diğeri de Özbekistan'dan çıkarılan bir Neandertal olmak üzere yalnızca iki fosil bulunmuştur. İnsanların yeryüzündeki hareketlerini açıklayan ve bu alanda faaliyet gösterenlerin çoğundan hala kabul gören geleneksel kuram, onların Avrasya'ya iki dalga halinde yayıldıklarını ileri sürer. İlk dalga, yaklaşık iki milyon yıl öncesinden başlayarak Afrika'yı hayret verici bir hızla, hatta neredeyse bir tür olarak ortaya çıkar çıkmaz terk eden Homo erectus'lardan oluşuyordu. Derken, yüz bin yılı aşkın bir süre önce, bugün yaşayan herkesin atası olan daha akıllı ve daha kıvrak bir yaratık türü, Afrika ovalarında ortaya çıktı ve ikinci bir dalga halinde yeryüzüne yayılmaya başladı. Kurama göre, bu yeni Homo sapiens'ler her gittikleri yerde daha aptal ve daha beceriksiz seleflerini saf dışı ettiler. Neandertal'lerin ve modem insanların Ortadoğu'da on binlerce yıl bir nevi birliktelik içinde var oldukları da biliniyor. Aklınıza şöyle bir soru takılabilir Madem Neandertal'ler bu kadar kuvvetli, uyumlu ve beyinsel açıdan avantajlıydılar, neden artık aramızda değiller. Olası (ama çok tartışılan) cevaplardan biri de şudur Belki de aramızdalar. … Bu kurama göre insan evrimi süreklilik arz etmiştir … Çok bölgelilik karşıtları, Eskidünya'nın dört bir yanında, yani Afrika'da, Çin'de, Avrupa'da, çok uzaktaki Endonezya Adaları'nda, insansıların ortaya çıktığı başka her yerde olanaksız miktarda paralel evrim gerektirdiği gerekçesiyle bu kurama itiraz ediyorlar. Antropolojinin başından defetmek için çok uğraştığı ırkçı bir görüşün, çok bölgelilik hipotezi tarafından teşvik edildiğine inananlar da var. 1960'ların başlarında, Pennsylvania, Üniversitesi'nden Carleton Coon adında ünlü bir antropolog, bazı modern ırkların farklı köklerden geldiğini ileri sürerek, aramızdan bazılarının daha üstün soylara ait olduğunu ima etmişti. Başka bir deyişle, siyahi Afrikalılar kısa bir süre önce ve Homo sapiens'e yalnızca yakın olan yaratıklardan türemişti. Thorne, kuramının herhangi bir bakımdan ırkçı olduğu fikrini üstüne basa basa (ve öyle inanıyorum ki içtenlikle) reddediyor. … Bunlar farklı türlerin değil, fiziksel birtakım farklılıklara sahip aynı türün buluşmalarıydı. Neandertal ve modern özelliklerin çarpıcı bir kolaylıkla ayırt edilebilir olmasından rahatsızlık duyanlar da vardı. Bir eleştirmenin ifadesiyle Bir katırın mesela ön tarafı eşeğe, arka tarafı ata benzemez. Neandertal'lerle Cro-Magnon'ların farklı sayılarda kromozomlara sahip olmaları da mümkündür. Birbirine yakın ama tıpatıp aynı olmayan türler birleştiği zaman sık sık ortaya çıkan bir komplikasyondur bu. Atlar aleminde mesela, atların 64, eşeklerin 62 kromozomu vardır. Bu ikisinin çiftleşmesi sonucu üreme açısından işe yaramaz sayıda (63 tane) kromozoma sahip bir döl çıkar ortaya. Anlayacağınız, kısır bir katırınız olur. ... mitokondriyal DNA'nın iki özelliği sayesinde bir nevi moleküler saat vazifesi gördüğünü anlamışlardı Yalnızca dişiler tarafından aktarıldığından, her yeni nesilde babaların DNA'sıyla karışıyor ve normal nükleer DNA'dan yaklaşık yirmi kat hızlı mutasyon geçiriyordu. Bu da zaman içinde genetik kalıplarının saptanmasını ve takip edilmesini kolaylaştırıyordu. Mutasyon hızlarının izlenmesiyle, büyük insan topluluklarının genetik tarihleri ve ilişkileri çözülebilirdi. … anatomik bakımdan modern insanların son 140.000 yıl içinde Afrika'da ortaya çıktığını ve günümüzde yaşayan tüm insanların bu nüfustan türediğini açıkladı. … söz konusu incelemede kullanılan Afrikalıların aslında Afrikalı-Amerikalılar olmalarıydı. … Mutasyonların varsayılan hızları konusunda da çok geçmeden şüpheler oluştu. Bu sefer kanıtlar sağlam çıktı. Neandertal DNA'sının şu anda yeryüzünde bulunan hiçbir DNA'ya benzemediğini bulgulayarak, Neandertal'lerle modern insanlar arasında hiçbir genetik bağlantı bulunmadığını açıkça gösterdi. Çok-bölgelilik savına indirilen asıl darbe, işte bu oldu. … insanların 25.000 yıl öncesi kadar yakın bir tarihte anayurtlarını terk eden, en fazla birkaç yüz Afrikalıdan türemiş olduklarını açıkladı. Yakın zaman önce küçük bir kurucu nüfustan tür emiş olduğumuz için, büyük bir değişkenlik kaynağı oluşturmaya yetecek kadar zamana da insan sayısına da ulaşılmamıştır. Ancak bütün bu saptamalar, Yeni Güney Galler'in batısındaki eski Mungo İnsanları'nın neredeyse sınırsız yükseklikteki sürpriz kapasitesini hiçe sayıyordu. ... Bulgulara göre, Mungo İnsanı anatomik bakımdan moderndi Tıpkı sizin ve benim gibiydi. Ama tükenmiş bir genetik nesle aitti. … oysa o da tüm diğer modern insanlar gibi, yakın geçmişte Afrika'yı terk eden atalardan türemiş olsaydı, tam tersi olması gerekirdi. Böylece her şey bir kez daha altüst oldu, diyor Thorne, saklamaya çalışmadığı bir sevinçle. Genelde, diye devam etti sözlerine, genetik kayıtlar Afrika'dan çıkış hipotezini destekler. Ama öte yandan, çoğu genetikçinin hiç değinmemeyi tercih ettiği bu aykırı insan gruplarına da rastlarsınız. İşin içyüzünü anlayabildiğimiz takdirde elimize inanılmaz miktarlarda bilgi geçecek, ama henüz anlayamıyoruz. Daha yolun çok başındayız. yapılmış incelemeleri kullanarak, yaşayan tüm Avrupalıları yalnızca yedi kadından oluşan bir kurucu nüfusa (kitaba adını veren Havva'nın Kızları'na) köklendirebildiğini ileri sürüyordu. Eh, sanırım zor bir konunun halka sevdirilmesine katkıda bulunduğu için teşekkürü hak ediyor, … Tek bir hücreden sağlanmış hiçbir veri sizi bu kadar kesin bir sonuca ulaştıramaz. Mitokondriyal DNA'yı geriye doğru takip ederseniz sizi belli bir yere götürecektir bir Ursula'ya, bir Tara'ya ya da adı her ne ise ona. Düşündüm de, gelişigüzel bir yola sapıp Londra dışına çıkmaya ve yolun John O'Groats'da son bulduğunu görüp, Londra'daki herkesin İskoçya'nın kuzeyinden geldiği sonucuna varmaya benziyordu bu. Oradan gelmiş olabilirler elbette, ama yüzlerce başka yerden gelmiş olmaları da eşit derecede mümkün. Araştırmalara tabii ki güvenebilirsiniz, yani çoğuna. Güvenemeyeceğiniz şey, insanların onlara ekseriyetle yükledikleri genel yargılardır. Hoşça kalın İnsanoğlunun ilahi ve caniyane tabiatını bundan daha iyi örnekleyen iki olay daha zor bulursunuz, benden söylemesi. Bir yandan ilahi kudretin en derin sırlarını çözerken, öte yandan bize asla zararı dokunmamış, kendisine ne yaptığımızı anlamaktan bile aciz bir yaratığın kökünü kurutabilen bir organizma türüdür insanoğlu. Onlar maalesef yok olup gittiler ve bizler boyutları bir hayli küçülmüş canlılarla dolu bir gezegende yaşıyoruz. Günümüzde yeryüzünde yaşamakta olan cüsseli (en az bir ton ağırlığında) kara hayvanlarının sayısı dördü geçmez Filler, gergedanlar, hipopotamlar ve zürafalar. Kısacası, insanlık yaradılış itibariyle diğer canlı varlıklar için kötü haber miydi, değil miydi. Deniz ineği, nesli tükenen son devasa hayvanlardan biriydi. Muazzam büyüklükteydi Yetişkin bir deniz ineği neredeyse 9 metre uzunluğa ve 10 ton ağırlığa ulaşabilirdi. sınavlarda adayların zorlandıkları en önemli bölümlerden biri paragraf konusudur. Okuma parçaları, ekonomiden ekolojiye, fizikten felsefeye kadar çok farklı bilim alanlarından seçilerek hem düşünsel ve dilsel bir zenginlik yaratılmış, hem de alanların kendine özgü kavramları ve terimleri parçanın akışı içerisinde verilerek bunların doğru ve kalıcı olarak öğrenilmesi hedeflenmiştir. Yukarıda ŞTİ. 'ne Aittir. izinsiz Olarak Hiçbir Biçimde Basılamaz, Çoğaltılamaz. Yönetim Yeri Caferaga Mah. Moda Cad. ELS-YDS Dergisi Aboneleri İçin Sayfa düzeni ve grafik tasarım M. Ender Öndeş 52. I-HOCH'UAN 132 64. 134 65. 136 66. 138 67. 140 68. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 23. 160 162 164 166 168 170 172 174 176 178 180 182 184 186 188 190 192 194 196 198 200 202 204 206 25. 238 41. 42. 312 314 316 318 320 322 324 326 328 330 332 334 336 338 340 342 344 346 348 350 352 354 356 358 360 362 364 366 368 370 372 374 376 378 380 382 384 386 388 390 392 394 396 398 400 402 404 406 408 410 Letters such as these, which were circulated from kitchen to kitchen and from attic to attic in English homes, were the best recruiting agents for the colonies, which were then so desperately in need of young women to serve the pioneers who were trying to create a new life for themselves in their chosen countries. Other girls read about the much better prospects overseas in newspapers and magazines, which also published advertisements giving details of free or assisted passages. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a) job (in the passage, as a servant) b) for each year c) money paid for work - especially unskilled work (plural) d) move from place to place, or person to person in a particular group pass round e) room at the top of a house in the space immediately below the roof f) the finding of new workers g) very greatly seriously h) one of the first people to go to a new country to work or settle i) chance of success, especially in work [plural) j) abroad in a foreign country across the sea k) without payment costing nothing I) provided with or given help with raising money for something m) journey by ship from one place to another 8 ELS 1. Those women who went to the colonies as servants A) were all recruited through agents back in England B) missed their families greatly C) played the most important role in attracting others D) found themselves being moved from kitchen to kitchen E) had the pioneering spirit necessary for starting new lives 2. Getting to the colonies from England for the servants A) could cost as little as £4 B) was essential if they wanted to escape life in English attics C) was only possible if an agent had recruited them D) did not pose any financial problem E) required a written invitation from someone already there 3. It is stated in the passage that A) no men could get jobs as servants in Australia B) servants were in great demand for the pioneers establishing new lives C) English homes were short of servants as so many went overseas D) the pioneers who went to the colonies were all men E) emigration from England to Australia started in 1849 1. A person with good qualifications is bound to have brighter than someone without. 2. The local shops are giving away sets of kitchen knives with every purchase over £50. 3. The news so quickly round the office that by the end of the day, everyone had heard it. 4. Many of the had no information as to what difficulties they would face once they arrived in their new land. 5. She wanted a bicycle, and begged her parents day and night for one. ELS 9 2 By means of several devices, we now know how to bring back lost memories. One method is free association , used by psychiatrists. There are certain drugs which also help in this process hypnotism, too, can be of tremendous value in exploring a patient's unconscious. a) for all time b) method for doing something, or for getting an intended result c) allow your thoughts to go from subject to subject stop concentrating d) whenever, however, and as much as you want to e) something which suggests the answer to, or gives information about a problem f) try to find out more through questioning g) large number of things that are connected to each other h) something which causes very great fear i) 10 very great very important ELS 1. According to the passage, it is possible A) to use drugs to cure patients of their past terrors B) to bring our lost memories to the surface through several methods C) that psychological problems develop through the inability to forget certain things D) that hypnotism can cause a patient to forget past terrors E) for most people to choose to forget about their past experiences 2. In the method of free association A) unpleasant memories are pushed into the unconscious mind B) the use of hypnotism is essential C) certain drugs are more effective than hypnotism D) all one's millions of past experiences are easily recalled E) the patient's co-operation is needed 3. We can conclude from the passage that A) most psychological disorders are caused by the inability to forget certain things B) only a skilful doctor can open up one's unconscious mind C) our unconscious mind only contains the things we don't want to remember D) many of one's past experiences are stored in one's unconscious mind E) a patient can't be made aware of his forgotten experiences without drugs or hypnotism 1. I've decided not to the matter just now, but don't think I've forgotten about it. 2. All of you have put effort into the campaign, so it's thanks to you that everything is going so well. 3. The chairman has given us no as to what he's going to say at the meeting, so we'll just have to wait and see. 4. The language teacher has a number of which she can employ in order to get her students to speak. 5. The lecture was so boring that on several occasions I realized that my attention had started to ELS 11 To obtain the majority of its benefits, the Palmyra needs to be climbed twice daily to extract the nutritious juice from its flower-bunches. It is this juice, converted by several different methods, that is the basis for a wide variety of other products. Collecting this juice, however, is arduous - and often dangerous - work, for the trees can top 30 metres in height. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a) more than b) produce naturally c) final result after treatment or processing d) get e) more than half of the total most f) something good or useful containing vitamins, etc. i) change (in form, etc.) j) tiring involving a lot of energy and effort k) be taller, higher or more than 12 ELS 1. When the Palmyra is climbed twice a day A) it is possible to get most of its benefits B) strict safety measures are taken C) the best coconuts can be picked D) it encourages the tree to grow to over thirty metres E) the flowers are collected for processing 2. According to the passage A) each palm tree can produce over 100 coconuts B) the juice from coconuts is very nutritious C) there are at least two and a half thousand types of palm tree D) there are several different ways of collecting Palmyra flower juice E) many people rely on palm trees for their basic food requirements 3. The juice from the Palmyra's flower-bunches A) is better quality if the tree is at least 30 metres high B) is only produced at certain times of the day C) gets converted into over 100 different food types D) is extracted by pressing the picked flowers E) provides the raw material for many other products 1. The results we weren't what we'd expected, so we may have to carry out the experiment again. 2. For the first time in the company's history, sales have 3. If you are planning to grow your own tomatoes, I'd recommend planting this variety as it generally 4. $10 million. a larger crop than other types. The best quality olive oil is that which is from the olives at the first pressing. 5. During the fermentation period of wine-making, the natural sugar in the grapes is to alcohol. ELS 13 Though he 1 may not admit it, he is vaguely aware of his deficiency, and frequently goes to 1 extremes to cover it up. Psychological studies, likewise, show that people with a really I keen sense of humour are not prone to much laughter. They are highly appreciative 1 of humour, but they are also discriminating. And they never overreact. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as ability to see when something is amusing (phrase) g) only to a small degree not clearly h) shortage or lack of something weakness i) often j) do more than is considered reasonable or acceptable (phrase) k) not very good of a poor standard I) very probably the case to be expected m) cause someone to react with laughter, anger, etc. (phrase) n) moreover in a similar way o) have a tendency generally behave in a certain way (phrase) p) feeling enjoyment, pleasure and understanding q) able to recognize good quality able to see small differences between good and bad 14 ELS 1. According to the writer, it isn't necessarily true that A) mediocre jokes are only laughed at by people with no sense of humour B) people with a keen sense of humour never overreact C) a person who is aware of his weak sense of humour will always overreact D) some jokes are better than others E) the longer a person laughs, the keener his sense of humour 2. Those with a really keen sense of humour A) never show it through laughter B) tell mediocre jokes to make other people overreact C) don't appreciate the company of those with a poor sense of humour D) are able to distinguish between good and bad jokes E) will laugh for a long time at a truly humorous joke 3. The writer believes that by overreacting to a joke A) some people are trying to hide the shortcomings in their sense of humour B) you make the person who told it feel inadequate in some way C) you spoil the humour for other people D) a person can demonstrate how mediocre it is E) a person shows how discriminating he is about humour 1. As young children, we absorb a lot of language before we utter our first words. , when we're learning a second language, we shouldn't be expected to produce it until we have taken it in. 2. He's very you know, and he will immediately notice if we serve him a cheap bottle of wine. 3. I remember you telling me this before, but tell me again as I've forgotten most of the details. 4. He's good at all the sciences physics, and he seems to understand even the most complicated concepts with no effort at all. 5. I'm to be home late this evening, so don't wait to eat if you're hungry. ELS 15 i They provide a natural barrier against avalanches and landslides, but the skiing industry, which proved a boon for poor Alpine farmers, is damaging the environment. Forests have been felled to make way for more ski runs, car parks, and hotels, and Alpine meadows have been abandoned by farmers keen to exploit tourism. Consequently, the avalanche has now become a common phenomenon. Forestry experts estimate that two-thirds of the several thousand avalanches that descend into inhabited parts each year are the result of forest depletion. 16 ELS 1. In the Alps, the attraction of tourism A) causes two thousand avalanches a year B) has diverted some farmers away from the care of the land C) has brought much-needed help for protecting the environment D) has lessened due to the threat of avalanches E) forced many farmers to leave the area 2. many farmers have had to turn to tourism for work B) the skiing industry has suffered a great decline C) only one-third of all avalanches occur in uninhabited parts D) many areas are now uninhabitable E) the frequency of avalanches has greatly increased 3. Alpine farmers A) were the people who initiated the development of the skiing industry B) have had much of their land taken from them by those involved in tourism C) used to be poor before the rise of the skiing industry D) were forced to turn their meadows into hotels and car parks E) feel that they have been exploited by tourism 1. Recent restrictions on imports have led to a of the country's oil reserves. 2. The police put around the stadium to try to stop those supporters without tickets from attempting to get in. 3. The puppies had obviously been by their mother, so we decided to take them in and look after them. 4. Environmentalists are claiming that the construction company more trees than necessary while building the new road. 5. She the stairs slowly, careful not to catch her foot in her long skirt. ELS 17 He was not the first to have the idea of the horseless coach. The Germans Daimler and Benz had invented it, but he was the first to use the assembly line for mass production. His Model-T car was the first to be produced on the assembly line. The new system cut the time in which the car was put together from 14 hours to 1 hour and 33 minutes. Eventually the price of the car fell from $1,200 to $295. The car lacked certain luxuries still, it could be relied on and did not need much looking after. Soon, the Model-T became the people's car. After nineteen years, when the Model-T became obsolete and sales dropped sharply - for other car manufacturers, copying Ford's assembly line system, were able to bring down the costs of much more attractive cars - Ford developed the new Model-A. It, too, was the most inexpensive car on the market. Today there are hardly any factories to be found where Ford's assembly line system is not being utilized for mass production. a) four-wheeled covered vehicle pulled by horses b) arrangement of workers and machines where each worker completes only one part of the production and then passes it along to another for the next stage c) the making of something in large quantities d) in the end after a time e) not have be without f) no longer used out-of-date g) quickly and to a great degree h) person or company that makes things in factories in large quantities i) make use of 18 ELS 1. Ford's assembly line system A) was invented by the Germans Daimler and Benz B) was reliable and did not need much maintenance C) is used in almost every factory today D) became obsolete after nineteen years E) could put a car together in twelve hours and twenty-seven minutes 2. Henry Ford A) went bankrupt when sales of his Model-T dropped B) introduced the system of mass production on an assembly line C) made profits of only $295 on his first mass-produced car D) produced the Model-T, which was the first car ever to be built E) worked in partnership with Daimler and Benz 3. Ford had to cease the production of the Model-T because A) manufacturing costs had risen to over $1,000 B) he-could not compete with the mass production methods of Daimler and Benz C) the Model-A was being sold at a much lower price D) other manufacturers had copied its design E) the price of more luxurious cars had dropped 1. Prices have risen in the last month and the government is battling to bring the economy under control. 2. Before we start spending money on a new office, perhaps we should see if we can 3. Computers and word processors have become so commonplace these days that the the space we already have more effectively. traditional typewriter is virtually 4. Although she is quite a good pianist, she the talent necessary to make a professional career in music. 5. We're saving a small amount of money every month and we hope, , to have enough to buy a car. ELS 19 The most common symptoms of allergic dermatitis are extremely dry skin, scaling, and redness with swelling and itching. The products most likely to cause this condition are lipstick, nail polish, soap, hair preparations, deodorants, and perfumes. Various drugs are being developed for the relief of allergy sufferers. However, your best help is to convert to a cosmetic product to which you have no harmful reaction. Remember that the product is not at fault or in any way injurious it is your particular sensitivity to it that creates the problem. A line of hypo-allergenic cosmetics that are relatively free from substances that have been found to create allergic reactions is on the market. opinions, etc. b) of the nose c) feeling of discomfort or pain d) having lines or splits on its surface because it is damaged e) sign of illness, indicated by changes in the body's condition f) a skin condition or disease g) becoming covered in hard, dry patches coming off in small, dry patches h) becoming greater in size or rounder than normal i) unpleasant feeling on the skin which makes the person want to scratch it j) to be expected probably the case k) lessening or removal of pain, discomfort, etc. I) change from one thing to another m) harmful damaging n) relating to or belonging to only one being separate or different from others of the same kind o) not causing an allergic reaction containing fewer substances known to cause allergic reactions p) compared with others comparatively 20 ELS 1. The writer advises those with allergic reactions to A) stop using soap B) take anti-allergenic drugs C) change their brand of cosmetics D) avoid all cosmetics E) complain to the manufacturer 2. It's likely that the aim of the survey was A) to test how well a particular brand of soap was selling B) to aid the drug manufacturers in their development of remedies C) to get evidence to support a legal claim for damages against a cosmetics company D) to collect the information needed to force cosmetics companies to withdraw certain products E) to get an idea of how women react physically to cosmetics 3. Certain products cause allergies because A) they are very low quality B) the women are taking drugs which react adversely to the cosmetics C) the women overuse them by as much as 25 percent D) certain people are sensitive to their ingredients E) the manufacturers use harmful ingredients because they are cheaper 1. He's having his old garage 2. I'm 3. One or two of the mugs are 4. There's a/an into a photographic studio. tall, but even I can't reach that top shelf. , but most of them are in perfect condition. programme I'd like to watch this evening if no one has any objections. 5. I think that the cause of my eye is the smoke from your cigarettes. ELS 21 Older authors such as Theodore Dreiser and Ellen Glasgow were still writing, but new authors wrote with new attitudes and styles. Most of the serious novelists critically analyzed American society and ways of life and tried to depict Americans as they really were. F. Scott Fitzgerald caught the restless spirit of the 1920s in his The Great Gatsby. Ernest Hemingway depicted war and disillusionment in his The Sun Also Rises and A Farewell to Arms. With his direct, unadorned style and forceful dialogue, Hemingway set a pattern for much future American literature. Sinclair Lewis, the first American to win the Nobel Prize for Literature, satirized the American businessman and small town in his Main Street and Babbitt. His style was mediocre, but his work vividly dissected a large section of American life. 1960-1969 b) describe c) unable to settle unable to relax or be still wanting or needing to move d) disappointment state of having lost belief in something e) goodbye f) weapons guns g) without decoration plain h) strong powerful confident i) criticize, make fun of or attack people's behaviour or society (for their wickedness, foolishness, etc.) j) neither very good nor very bad second-rate k) clearly in detail I) examine carefully part by part analyze m) one of the parts into which something can be divided 22 ELS 1. Ernest Hemingway's style A) was extremely satirical B) influenced a great many American writers C) made him the first American to win the Nobel Prize for Literature D) was criticized by most of the serious novelists E) was analytical and critical 2. Until Sinclair Lewis, A) no other writer had used satire B) American writing was considered mediocre C) the only successful writer was Ernest Hemingway D) American life did not feature in novels E) no American author had been awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature 3. According to the passage, many authors of the Jazz Age A) were disillusioned because of the war B) received awards such as the Nobel Prize for Literature C) had a mediocre style D) wrote about the realities of American life E) were criticized by American society 1. He had described his home town so to me that on my first visit there, I felt as if I had been there before. 2. Can you pick me up in an hour as I have a few to make before we finally leave. 3. She gets really if she stays in one place for longer than about three months. 4. 5. I want a very simple, In his books, Charles Dickens clearly dress with no ribbons, bows or lace. the poverty of nineteenth-century England. ELS 23 They eat salmon liver, and salmon skulls, and they process the fish into burgers and sausage. They eat 300,000 tons of the fish each year, a third of the world's total catch. The center of it all is Tokyo's Tsukiji fish market, the largest on earth. Long before sunrise, the market is buzzing. Hundreds of men and women rush around between stalls, shout orders at one another, slice fish, work the telephones, and joke under bright strings of lights that shine down on acres of iced-down fish steaks, shark fillets, and thick red slabs of tuna stacked like wood. The concrete floors are newly washed and swept. The whole place smells fresh, like the sea. treat in a way that changes something's form in order to make a product g) move quickly, busily or excitedly h) large stand or table on which goods are displayed in a market i) cut into thin, wide, flat pieces j) kept cool with ice k) thick, flat piece I) neatly arranged in piles m) hard building material made from a mixture of cement and sand 24 ELS 1. It is clear from the passage that A) Pacific salmon are most commonly found in Japanese waters B) Tokyo's Tsukiji fish market is close to the sea C) the Japanese prepare Pacific salmon in a variety of ways D) the only fish eaten in Japan is the Pacific salmon E) the Japanese don't eat meat 2. In Tokyo's Tsukiji fish market A) only Pacific salmon are sold B) salmon are processed into burgers and sausage C) over 300,000 tons of fish are sold every year D) only frozen fish are available E) work starts very early in the morning 3. It is stated in the passage that A) the Japanese consume three times as many fish as the rest of the world B) the Japanese eat more Pacific salmon than any other nation C) fishing is Japan's biggest industry D) the only fish market in Japan is Tokyo's Tsukiji E) Tokyo's Tsukiji fish market sells a third of the world's total catch of fish 1. 2. At the end of our road, there is a large factory, where meat is into salami and other products. 3. Many dieticians say it is better to eat vegetables because cooking removes many of the nutrients. 4. That office block, which has just been completed, really spoils the look of our town. 5. You should the potatoes quite thinly before cooking them, so use a sharp knife. ELS 25 Armed bandits bound and gagged six unarmed guards, entered a storeroom containing artifacts from the Roman town of Herculaneum, and stole about 280 objects - gold rings, bracelets, earrings, and precious stones. Authorities said that the stolen items also included a small bronze statue of Bacchus inlaid with copper and silver, a bronze vase, and a box of coins. Art historians and others criticized lax security that permitted two gunmen to climb a wall, enter the site, and break through a flimsy partition to get into the room where the artifacts were kept. Some of the critics also complained that the guards were unarmed. Officials said it would be hard for anyone to sell the stolen objects because all had been catalogued and photographed, and most had been exhibited and published. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as carrying a weapon, especially a gun robber carrying a weapon one of a gang tie up tightly with rope or string tie a piece of cloth round the mouth to prevent speaking or shouting e) something made by man, usually of archaeological interest f) diamonds, rubies, emeralds, etc. g) cover with soil, rocks, etc. h) explosion of a volcano i) one of a collection or list of things j) having pieces of metal, wood, etc., set into the surface of another kind of metal, wood, etc., so that the resulting surface is smooth and level, and a design or pattern is formed k) piece of metal used as money I) not careful, strict or obeying rules inattentive m) made of light, thin material, therefore weak and easily damaged n) thin wall, or screen, dividing two rooms, or one room into separate parts 26 ELS 1. It is stated in the passage that the stolen goods A) were the most valuable items in the museum B) were part of the museum's exhibition C) have now been pictured in a catalog to make resale impossible D) consisted entirely of jewelry E) were too well-known to be sold easily 2. The artifacts stolen from the museum A) came from the ancient city of Pompeii B) were not on display C) had never been exhibited in the museum D) E) were all made of metal 3. Some people commented that A) the guards shouldn't have been carrying guns B) the statue of Bacchus was the most valuable item C) the thieves had clearly been in possession of a catalog D) the thieves were able to take advantage of poor security E) it was strange that none of the guards were harmed 1. The box the goods were packed in was so that it fell apart in the post. 2. The prisoners were made to stand in a line with their hands 3. their backs. Procedures seem to be so attention is paid to hygiene at all. 4. behind in that hospital that I doubt that any From the map, they guessed that the treasure was in a deserted plot of land, about two hundred metres to the east of the castle. 5. She sat quietly on one side of the listening to their conversation. ELS 27 Technological advance has brought jet airplanes and streamlined trains whizzing over transportation lines, helicopters carrying the mail, missiles hurtling through space telegraphs, long-distance phones, radio, television, telstar and flashing communications. These are just a few examples of the Revolution in Speed, which is hastening us along in its breathless velocity. As for reading, thousands of newspapers, hundreds of magazines and dozens of books roll from the presses daily, speeded by technological invention. Yet no one has enough time to read as much as he would wish. We hurry all day long - workers hurry to their jobs in the morning and they hurry through the working hours in an attempt to accomplish as much as possible. After work they hurry home to hurry out in the evening to a business dinner, a social function, or one of many fascinating diversions. There is more reading to be done than ever before and less time in which to do it. What is the answer. Not more time in which to read, Out the ability to read more in the time we have. (From Reading Instructions for Today's Children by Nila Banton Smith) Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 28 leisure activities ELS 1. Technological advance A) B) C) D) E) made people's lives easier, but caused many of them to feel anxious because of its speed made speed the characteristic of our age, reflecting it onto our everyday life as well left people no time to read, and as a result television viewing became so commonplace decreased interest in reading though reading materials increased in number enormously is greatest in the area of telecommunications 2. At work, as well as in their personal lives, people A) B) C) D) E) have to acquire different skills to use the new machinery should set aside more time for reading than they do for recreation have to learn as much about the new technology as possible have to act hurriedly so as to succeed in as many things as possible should cut down on their activities so as to have more time for reading 3. The writer suggests that A) B) C) D) E) people should find a way to increase the amount of their reading in the limited time they are left whatever the person's job is, he has to read to keep pace with the speed of our age the time spent on social functions and recreation can be reduced in order to spare more time for reading people should learn to make a good selection of what to read in the little time they have more time for reading can only be achieved with a well-organized daily routine, without hurrying to do everyting 1. Because I haven't had any exercise for many years, even running for the bus leaves me these days. 2. I have been working non-stop all day, but I don't seem to have very much. 3. I found the lecture absolutely despite my previous reservations about the speaker. 4. She to reach her destination as it was gradually getting dark. 5. Everybody in the family seems to have forgotten about that tragic event, but me, I've never stopped thinking about it. ELS 29 When they read to a child from story books, comic strips of the better type, and children's magazines, he becomes aware that books, magazines, and newspapers hold something of interest and amusement for him. He also comes to realize that this something which he enjoys is tightly locked within black and white symbols, and that these symbols can be unlocked only when one knows how to read. This awareness and interest form a springboard from which he can leap into learning to read in school, and into the voluntary reading of self-selected books. Parents, however, should not continue reading to their child year after year as he passes through the elementary grades. If the child can only get his reading pleasure through his parents' efforts, he may not have much incentive for doing the reading himself. Parents should decrease their reading to the child as he learns to read and put him on his own as soon as possible. (From Reading Instructions for Today's Children by Nila Banton Smith) Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a) cartoon stories b) entertainment c) strictly securely d) released e) state of being conscious f) create constitute g) a launch towards a higher level h) jump i) willing j) chosen on one's own k) advance proceed (phrasal verb) I) motive m) by himself (phrase) 30 ELS 1. Starting to read to a child at an early age A) enables him to amuse himself with the comic strips B) stimulates his wish to read by himself C) makes it possible for him to select his own books D) is essential during the preschool period E) makes him a successful student in elementary school 2. If parents go on reading to the child despite his acquiring this ability A) they may direct him, even if unconsciously, to appreciate what they themselves do B) the child can't learn to make a good selection of what to read C) the child is likely to lack the motivation to read on his own D) he can never be fluent in reading E) he becomes a listener rather than a reader 3. Parents are advised A) to teach the child to read before he starts elementary school B) to start reading with amusing stories so that the child becomes more interested in reading C) to leave the child on his own when he no longer gets any pleasure from being read to D) to stop reading to the child when he starts elementary school so that they don't interfere with E) to stop reading to their child once he has sufficiently acquired reading ability the teacher's instructions 1. All of the money spent by charities comes from contributions. 2. The cat 3. The children's new toys provided them with hours of 4. Before learning to onto the wall, off the other side, and then ran across the neighbour's garden. the letters, young children have to spend a lot of time drawing lines. 5. If you don't fasten the rope , it may come undone. Spices, condiments, herbs, vinegar and pickles are used for this purpose. There is no objection to them for the normal stomach, and there is no evidence that they can cause damage to the normal stomach lining. Tea, coffee, manufactured drinks, and alcohol also form part of the diet. They have no nutritive value but add to the pleasure of a meal, in moderation. Tea and coffee both contain caffeine, which is a mild stimulant and also causes the kidneys to excrete more water. They may cause sleeplessness, but not all people are affected. Alcohol, if not consumed excessively by adults, cannot be strongly objected to on medical grounds. a) society, usually as considered in terms of culture and progress b) things items c) eat use up d) nourishing e) collective name for pepper, cinnamon, ginger, etc. f) flavours added after cooking, for example salt, mustard, etc. g) collective name for parsley, mint, dill, etc. h) inside layer i) produced in factories j) not using or doing too much (phrase) k) light drug which increases bodily or mental activity (two words) I) discharge from the system m) too much n) for any medical reasons (phrase) 32 ELS 1. The feature which such items as spices, condiments, herbs, vinegar, and pickles have in common is that A) they are all manufactured rather than natural B) they can all do harm to the stomach lining C) each can be classified as a mild stimulant D) they are not nutritious but give flavouring to food E) they are not favoured on medical grounds 2. From a medical point of view, A) there is a close link between the person's age and the amount of alcohol he drinks B) eating foods that have no nutritive value does nothing but tire out the stomach C) alcohol isn't considered very harmful when drunk in moderate amounts by adults D) it is important from a psychological point of view to eat meals that are palatable as well as E) tea and coffee are the most significant factors in kidney failure nutritious 3. The writer states that A) the effect of coffee and tea on sleep can vary from person to person B) manufactured drinks are more harmful than tea and coffee C) tea, coffee and manufactured drinks are usually consumed more when the person is dieting D) kidneys are the organs which are affected most when tea and coffee are drunk excessively E) people should try as much as possible to avoid eating foods lacking nutrient value 1. Ancient often worshipped things which were related to nature, such as the sun, the wind, hurricanes, etc. 2. Many doctors say that wine drunk may actually be beneficial to health, although too much is clearly undesirable. 3. Because of the number of souvenirs he'd bought, his suitcase was heavy and he had to pay an extra charge at the airport check-in. 4. Junk food, such as hamburgers, hot dogs and chips, is a very poor source. 5. The building was totally by fire. ELS 33 This rabbit had no natural enemies in the Antipodes*, so it multiplied incredibly quickly. It overran a whole continent, and caused devastation to herbage which might have maintained millions of sheep and cattle. Scientists discovered that this particular variety of rabbit was susceptible to a fatal virus disease. Trying to create local epidemics of this disease, they found out that there was a type of mosquito which acted as the carrier of this disease and passed it on to the rabbits. So while the rest of the world was trying to get rid of mosquitoes, Australia was encouraging this one. It effectively spread the disease all over the continent and drastically diminished the rabbit population. * Antipodes, dünyanın öbür ucu anlamına gelir. Ancak parçada Avustralya anlamında kullanılmıştır. sensitive or prone j) causing death k) disease that affects only a particular area (two words) I) very severely very greatly m) reduce 34 ELS The rabbits A) were finally exterminated, but only after a long struggle B), had been in Australia for a long time, growing in number with each year, when the first settlers arrived there C) were to be killed, for they were carrying a fatal virus which was also dangerous for human beings D) increased in number rapidly in Australia, because nothing interfered with their breeding there E) soon showed an incredible resistance to the fatal virus passed on to them via the mosquitoes 2. The Australians A) B) C) D) E) had come there from various countries around the world wanted to get rid of the rabbits because they were destroying pasture that could be used for sheep and cattle were making their living merely by raising sheep and cattle on their farms hadn't expected to meet with such a big rabbit population on their new land weren't wise enough to get rid of the rabbits by their own efforts 3. We can conclude from the passage that A) B) C) D) E) the rabbits were reduced in number through a fatal virus deliberately spread by a kind of mosquito it had become a matter of life and death for the people in Australia to get rid of the rabbits though it was hazardous for themselves as well, the settlers nonetheless encouraged the spread of the epidemic being a pioneer requires a man or woman to be prepared to face certain risky conditions Australians today owe their prosperous life to the efforts of their enterprising ancestors 1. Old people and very young children are often more to infection than other age groups. 2. Since the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear reactor disaster, cases of childhood thyroid cancer in the 3. A lot of small businesses were set up in Britain during the 1980s by 4. The flood caused great 5. If we cut down on some of our luxuries, our financial problems can be considerably area have to 80 times the world average. individuals, who were encouraged by the government. to the crops as well as to the houses. It is not a problem of nourishment, but of the spirit. This side of the problem is all but neglected. We must be careful to substitute some other kind of pleasure to take the place of the original pleasure of the mother's breast.