wordy reports. 2. This new equipment will provide the for us to produce twice as much as we are doing now. 3. It's that she's decided not to wait for us, as I didn't say she should in the message I left. 4. Thomas Hardy set all of his novels against the of southwestern England's country life. 5. I hate being in the same class as her because she's really and sulks if anyone does better than her. Arab traders artfully withheld the true source of these spices, however, and they became valuable items of commerce early in the evolution of the spice trade. The most notable uses of spices in very early times were in medicine and in the making of holy oils. Belief in the healing power of spices filtered down, in a moderated form, into the Middle Ages and even into early modern times. It is not known when spices were first used in food. Certainly, the ancient Greeks and Romans used spices to flavour food and beverages because they discovered that spices helped to preserve foods, mask the flavour of partially spoiled meats, and also brought a change of flavour. Knowledge of the use of spices to preserve and flavour food slowly spread through Europe. Finally, in the last third of the 15th century, the Europeans decided to build ships and venture abroad in search of a route to the spice-producing countries. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as be gradually passed on from person to person (phrase) tea, coffee, orwine m) keep something in good condition for a long time n) cover prevent something from being noticed o) not completely in parts p) decayed no longer good q) the taste of something r) go somewhere, especially somewhere that may be dangerous Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Initially, spices were A) sold for very low prices B) given in exchange for oil C) grown by Arab traders D) never sold because they were a secret E) sold to the West by Arabs 2. Spices were first used A) by the ancient Greeks and Romans B) mostly for healing and religious purposes C) in the West in the early Middle Ages D) to make partially spoiled meat edible E) to change the flavour of commonly consumed foods 3. We are told in the passage that the ancient Greeks and Romans used spices for all the following, except A) to make food taste even better B) in religious ceremonies to please their gods C) to keep food from going bad D) to hide the taste of rotting food E) in certain drinks to add flavour Although the man wasn't one of the robbers, he was arrested because he information from the police by not telling them everything he knew about the crime. 2. The ancient Egyptians found a way to the bodies of their pharaohs before putting them into the pyramids. 3. The soup tasted horrible because I forgot to put the salt and pepper and other 4. While Pam and Fiona were on holiday, they decided to leave their hotel and the tourist areas in while I was making it. and 5. into the backstreets of the city. My grandmother's diamond ring and several other items of jewellery were stolen from her home. Some critics, however, have said that Dumas's work is not good literature because it is sometimes carelessly written and historically inaccurate. It was produced in Paris in 1829 and was a great success. Dumas became prominent as one of the leaders of the Romantic movement. In the 1840s, Dumas turned nearly all his attention to writing vivid historical novels. The best known are The Three Musketeers, and The Count of Monte Cristo. Dumas hired collaborators, added material here and there to their work, and changed the plot and characters, giving the works the charm and movement that made his novels popular. Collaborators' names never appeared on the title pages of these works, but this omission was a practice of the day. Dumas earned vast sums, but he spent money faster than he earned it. His wish to be elected to the French Academy was never fulfilled. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as clear, lively (of a memory, description, the imagination, etc.) g) employ someone for a short time by paying a certain amount of money h) people who work together for a special purpose i) in several places (phrase) j) the set of events on which a story or play is based k) the ability to please or delight other people attractiveness I) the act of leaving something out m) a regular custom or habit at a particular time and place in history n) amount of money o) (be) made true (be) satisfied come to be realized 118 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The novels and plays which Dumas wrote A) are not worth reading because they're not good, and too tedious to keep the reader interested B) create a true and precise portrayal of the lives of prominent historical figures C) have been criticized by some literary authorities as being inferior in quality D) are full of dialogues, but not much happens in them E) tend not to have very strong or realistic plots 2. Dumas's first success A) was with a novel rather than a play B) occurred during the Romantic period in literary history C) came when he started being attentive to his work D) was with his novel The Three Musketeers E) came with a play written about a royal figure 3. The passage tells us that Alexandre Dumas A) paid critics and others to give his work good reviews B) never credited those who worked on his novels alongside him C) co-authored several novels with others of equal status D) adapted legends and other stories for his novels E) achieved all his goals and died an extremely wealthy man 1. Fiona always has dreams, which she remembers clearly when she wakes up in the morning. 2. It is to think that because something is expensive it must be of good quality. 3. The artist Van Gogh was not during his lifetime, but became extremely famous after his death. 4. Shakespeare is, without doubt, the most famous English - most people 5. The printers made a mistake and left the company's phone number out of the advertisement. in the world have heard of him, even if they aren't interested in theatre. This meant that the advert was unusable. This may initially seem like a simple question. Everyone knows that an elm tree is a plant, whereas a dog is not. Nevertheless, the precise definition of plants is still a matter of debate among some scientists. All living things are made up of protoplasm, a complex material composed of organic substances such as sugars, proteins and fats. Protoplasm is arranged in tiny units called cells. All living things are composed of cells. As recently as the late 1960s, scientists believed that all organisms could be classified as members of either the plant or the animal kingdom. Life forms that are green and that can synthesize their own food using light energy were put in the plant kingdom. Those organisms that lack green pigment and are able to move about were considered to be animals. Researchers now agree that living things are more properly divided into two groups-prokaryotes and eukaryotes. These major groups comprise five kingdoms. Major differences between cells are used to distinguish between these groups and kingdoms. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as be without something not have something j) natural colouring matter of plants and animals k) correctly suitably I) include contain m) see or recognize the differences between Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The main concern of the passage is A) how protoplasm is arranged into cells differently in plants and animals B) why all life forms should be classified into five major groups C) why plants manage to feed themselves but the life forms in the animal kingdom don't D) the disagreement between scientists as to the definition of a plant and an animal cell E) the difficulty of giving a distinct definition separating plants from other life forms 2. We understand from the passage that protoplasm A) is a simple life form B) is a method of grouping life forms C) is a separate life form D) contains cells E) is the distinctive characteristic of plants 3. The current method of classifying life forms involves A) separating the plant and animal kingdoms B) taking significant differences in cell formation into account C) seeing if an organism contains green colouring D) noting if an organism can produce food chemically E) checking whether the organism contains protoplasm 1. Graham and Dan are identical twins. They look so alike that their mother is the only person 2. According to the Dewey Decimal System, library books are 3. Whether the Vikings visited America before Columbus or not was long a/an who can between them. under subjects and authors. among historians, until, in 1963, it was proved that they had come first, because archaeologists discovered the remains of a Viking settlement in Newfoundland, Canada. 4. The Prince's Trust is a charitable organization, set up by Prince Charles, which aims to help young people who have plans and ambitions, but the financial means to fulfil their dreams. 5. The Hauffmans are coming over from Germany for a short visit in February - they don't know the date yet, but it should be towards the beginning of the month. Borg won his first tournament when he was 11. In four years, he won all the world's junior titles, and became the first of the teenage wonders to achieve world-class status. He dropped out of school when he was in the ninth grade, at the age of 15, and qualified for the Swedish Davis Cup team, becoming the youngest player ever to win a cup match. This was his first encounter with team captain Lennart Bergelin, who later became Borg's full-time coach. In 1975 Borg's three match victories, including doubles, brought Sweden its first Davis Cup. In his first decade in competitive tennis, the goldenhaired Swede broke more records than anyone else in the history of tennis. Borg was only 26 when he retired, and he failed in his attempt eight years later to make a comeback with his old wooden racket - made obsolete by the oversized models that are now used in the game. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as remaining calm in spite of difficulties continuous and strong the action used to hit a ball with a racket (be) named amusingly or descriptively a regular journey from place to place for the purpose of playing in competitions f) a number of competitions between players, played until the best competitor wins g) a person who has marvellous or amazing properties h) one's position or rank considered in relation to other people i) stop attending {phrase) j) win the right to take part in something, such as a competition k) meeting I) a person who trains sportsmen and sportswomen m) the act of winning or state of having won n) do something better than anyone has ever done it before (idiomatic phrase) o) return to a former position of importance (phrase) p) old-fashioned and not really used any more less effective than newer models q) biggerthan usual Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. One reason that Bjorn Borg was nicknamed Ice-Borg was that A) he never panicked B) he had very good manners C) all his rivals hated him D) he was physically very big E) he was very cold towards his opponents 2. Bjorn Borg A) was the first teenager to become world-famous B) started playing tennis when he was about 11 C) lost many tennis matches between the ages of 26 and 34 D) was better-educated than most tennis players E) was a world-class player in his early teens 3. Lennart Bergelin A) was the coach of the Swedish Davis Cup team B) led Borg's team during his first ever cup match C) was coached by Borg some years after they first met D) beat Borg during his first Davis Cup match E) was beaten by Borg during his first Davis Cup * 1. Linda's parents were very upset when she decided to 2. Our army fought bravely, but the pressure from the enemy was of university and become a tour guide instead. and after several days of fighting we had to surrender. 3. The Manchester United has decided that the players are not to listen to music in the changing rooms before the match because he thinks it disturbs their concentration. 4. The British army beat Napoleon's army at Waterloo, near Brussels, in 1815, and one of the 5. Barry bought his first computer in 1983, but that model is now major stations in London was named Waterloo , in honour of that because computer technology has developed so much since then. ELS 123 The mothers provide milk for the young for a year or more. Like other whales, dolphins have lungs and breathe through a single nostril, called the blowhole, located on top of the head. The blowhole is opened during their frequent trips to the surface to breathe. In contrast to some of the large whales, dolphins and porpoises have teeth, which they use to seize their food, consisting primarily of marine fish. Certain species of marine dolphins are the best-known biologically because they survive well in captivity, which means they can be more carefully observed. The bottle-nosed dolphin has been the most intensively studied because of its adaptability to salt-water holding tanks. It is a major participant in acrobatic shows at oceanariums and is noted for its curiosity toward humans. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. One of the differences between some whales and dolphins is that A) whales don't provide milk for their young, but dolphins do B) although dolphins have lungs for breathing, most whales don't C) while all dolphins are warm-blooded, whales are cold-blooded D) whales are less aggressive than dolphins and not as big as them E) whereas all dolphins have teeth, some whales don't have any 2. From the information given in the passage, we can infer that dolphins A) have difficulty surviving in captivity B) use only one lung at a time C) are among the largest marine animals D) don't breathe underwater E) cannot survive in climates warmer than their body temperature 3. One of the special characteristics of the bottle-nosed dolphin is that A) it is very interested in people B) unlike others, it lives in salt water C) it is cleverer than most animals D) it enjoys being held in captivity E) it is an especially studious animal An English furniture maker of the 18th century, Thomas Chippendale was for his book, The Gentleman & Cabinet Maker's Directory, which illustrated almost every style of mid-18th-century domestic furniture. 2. After the oil tanker sank, we were horrified to see the amount of oil floating on the of the water. 3. While security guards were transferring the money from the bank into their van, armed robbers managed to 4. the money from them. They've bought a new house which is on top of a hill, so it has a wonderful view of the surrounding countryside. 5. The success or failure of first-year university students often depends on their as the difference between high school and university can be very difficult to get used to. Now its wings are short, paddle-like flippers that are entirely useless for flight. The bird has lived for ages in or near the Antarctic regions, where it has few enemies. Thus it came to spend all of its time on land or in the water. For generations it did not fly. In the course of evolution, its wings became small and stiff and lost their long feathers. The penguins, however, became master swimmers and divers. Of all birds, they are the most fully adapted to water. Their thick coat of feathers provides a smooth surface that is impenetrable to water. Their streamlined bodies glide through the water easily. The birds use their wings as swimmers use their arms in a crawl stroke, and they steer with their feet. Penguins can swim at speeds of more than 25 miles per hour. When they want to leave the water, they can leap as much as 6 feet from the water's surface onto a rock or iceberg. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 126 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The birds from which penguins are descended A) initially had to fight a number of enemies in Antarctica B) had flippers to enable them to swim easily C) were as capable of flight as any normal bird D) fled to Antarctica to escape from their enemies E) were the first birds to lose the ability to fly 2. Penguins are especially well-suited to water because they A) live in Antarctica, which is surrounded by water B) have flippers, instead of wings, and streamlined bodies C) have long feathers to protect them from the icy polar water D) are simply no longer very good at flying E) spend so much of their time living on the land 3. When penguins desire to get out of the water, A) they swim very fast in order to get above the surface B) they move their wings and fly onto the nearest iceberg C) their feet help them gain enough speed to leap above the waves D) their streamlined bodies enable them to do so quite easily E) they are capable of jumping nearly six feet high to do it 1. After finishing the marathon, my legs were incredibly and I found it difficult to climb the stairs because I couldn't bend my knees properly. 2. The soldiers tried to break through the enemy lines, but the lines proved to be and the soldiers were forced to retreat to their own base. 3. Though I was born in America, my most famous comes from Europe- 4. There are many people who know how to make cakes, but Mr. Goedekuchen is a/an my grandfather was a well-known member of the royal family of Yugoslavia. baker and people come from all over the city to buy his top-quality baked goods. 5. Mark Twain, before he became a writer, used to be a riverboat pilot and his boat up and down the Mississippi. ELS 127 His greatest breakthroughs in composition came in his instrumental work, including his symphonies. Unlike his predecessor Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, for whom writing music seemed to come easily, Beethoven always struggled to perfect his work. In the late 1700s Beethoven began to suffer from early symptoms of deafness. The cause of his disability is still uncertain. By 1802 Beethoven was convinced that the condition not only was permanent, but was getting progressively worse. He spent that summer in the country and wrote what has become known as the Heiligenstadt Testament. In the document, seemingly intended for his two brothers, Beethoven expressed his humiliation and despair. For the rest of his life he searched for a cure, but by 1819 his deafness had become total. Afterwards, in order to have conversations with his friends, Beethoven had them write down their questions and replied orally. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as increasingly k) apparently i) a feeling of embarrassment and shame m) the complete loss of hope n) a medicine or treatment to end an illness o) using the mouth in speech 128 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Perhaps the biggest problem in Beethoven's life was A) the gradual loss of his hearing over a period of about twenty years B) the fact that he had to respond in writing to the questions of his friends C) when he lost his two brothers and wrote the Heiligenstadt for them D) his sudden and unexpected deafness in the early nineteenth century E) the fact that he was always being compared to the superior Mozart 2. Unlike Wolfgang Amadous Mozart, A) Beethoven's music was loved by all sorts of people B) Beethoven wrote music that greatly affected people C) Beethoven refused to perform uncorrected music D) Beethoven's music was never intended to be sung E) Beethoven had to work very hard to write his music 3. Beethoven's music is said to A) have brought about the end of the classical period of music B) have had a great influence on the works of the composer Mozart C) be among the most romantic music ever composed D) have started a new generation of instrumental love songs E) have served as a connection between two different periods of music 1. Tom is very lucky because foreign languages seem to to him - he was practically fluent in Greek after spending less than a year there. 2. While Rachel has a serious that prevents her from using her legs, she manages to get around quite well in a wheelchair and leads a full and active life. 3. After her husband died in the war, Sophia fell into and felt that life just simply wasn't worth living any more. 4. William is very experienced at teaching children - he knows how to handle their problems and keep them under control. 5. The invention of the wheel was an important in technology as it allowed people to transport themselves and their belongings much more easily. ELS 129 Such domesticated animals carry people and their burdens. They pull machinery and help cultivate fields. They provide food and clothing. As pets they may amuse or console their owners. Domesticated animals are those that have been bred in captivity for many generations. While a single animal may be tamed, only a species of animal can be considered domesticated. In the course of time, by selective breeding, certain animals have changed greatly in appearance and behaviour from their wild ancestors. There is a vast difference between the scrawny red jungle fowl of southern Asia and its descendant, the meaty, egg-laying farm chicken. Not all domestic animals are tame at all times. An angry bull, a mother goose, or a mother sow with young piglets can be vicious. Some creatures confined in zoos breed in captivity. The lion is an example. These animals are not domesticated, however, for they remain wild and dangerous. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as choosing the parents of animals in order to produce young with certain characteristics (phrase) j) very thin and bony k) a thick tropical forest I) an animal, person or thing that has developed from an earlier type of a similar one m) wild or dangerous and likely to hurt people n) kept in an enclosed place (phrase) I30 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The author suggests that A) people have contributed greatly to the advancement of animals B) if there were no animals, most people would be hungry and naked C) without the help of animals, people wouldn't have progressed so far D) animals are generally better at working on farms than people are E) it would be impossible to transport machines without the help of animals 2. The passage tells us that the lions kept in zoos A) are a different variety to the wild type, altered by selective breeding B) are capable of helping out with many jobs difficult for men C) are not domesticated, but still wild D) do not bear any resemblance to their ancestors in the wild E) are not capable of breeding in captivity 3. The passage implies that, by the process of selective breeding A) animals are altered so that they are more useful to man B) wild animals are captured and kept in cages C) normally friendly animals may become very dangerous D) any wild bird is changed into a chicken over time E) domestic animals are taught to choose their own mates 1. No matter how many times I watch the Monty Python film The Life of Brian, it never fails to 2. Aaron was attacked by a/an me. I think it's one of the funniest films ever made. dog on the way to work and needed to go to the hospital. 3. When Winston lost his job, it was impossible to him - whatever anyone said or did, he remained seriously depressed. 4. The Romanian language is a/an of Latin. Because of this, it has a lot of the same words as French, which also comes from Latin. 5. When we finally checked into our hotel, we were able to put down our suitcases. It was a great relief as they had been an unpleasant , each weighing about thirty kilos. ELS 131 They called themselves l-ho ch'uan, or Righteous and Harmonious Fists. They practised boxing skills that they believed made them impervious to bullets. To Westerners they became known as the Boxers, and their uprising was called the Boxer Rebellion. Most Boxers were peasants or urban thugs from northern China who resented the growing influence of Westerners in their land. They organized themselves in 1898, and in the same year the Chinese government - then ruled by the Ch'ing Dynasty - secretly allied with the Boxers to oppose such outsiders as Christian missionaries and European businessmen. The Boxers failed to drive foreigners out of China, but they set the stage for the successful Chinese revolutionary movement of the early 20th century. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as not affected by g) a small piece of metal with a rounded or pointed end, fired from a gun h) of a town or city i) a violent person, often a criminal j) feel anger k) join together with I) force someone to leave m) create the conditions for something to happen (idiomatic phrase) n) connected with great social change, especially the changing of a ruler or political system by force 132 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The Boxers had little fear of guns because A) they vastly outnumbered their opponents B) according to their beliefs, guns couldn't harm them C) they believed that moral law was on their side D) they had the open support of the army and government E) their identities were hidden so no one knew who they were 2. In general, the people who joined the movement were A) highly-placed political figures B) ordinary middle-class city dwellers C) members of the famous Ch'ing Dynasty D) from higher classes of the society E) poor agricultural workers and criminals 3. In 1898, the Chinese government A) took a firm stand against the Ch'ing Dynasty B) sent out spies in order to overthrow the Boxers C) were in favour of foreign influences in their country D) tried to prevent the Boxers from harming foreigners E) worked in alliance with the Boxers against foreigners 1. Susie is to criticism. You can say anything you want to her, and it won't hurt her feelings or alter her behaviour. 2. As the white settlers moved westward in America, native Indians were from their land. 3. As Dublin is a strictly Catholic Christian city, everything is closed on Sundays, so as a tourist there's not much to do then except about the streets or do a bit of window-shopping. 4. The older employees having such a young supervisor, and were obviously disturbed by taking orders from him. 5. John grew up on a farm in the country, so when he moved to London, he found it very difficult to adjust to a/an lifestyle. ELS 133 Paintings and power shovels, sonatas and submarines, dramas and dynamos they all have one thing in common. They are fashioned by people. They are artificial, in contrast to everything that is natural - plants, animals, and minerals. The average 20th-century person would distinguish paintings, sonatas, and dramas as forms of art, while viewing power shovels, submarines, and dynamos as products of technology. This distinction, however, is a modern one that dates from an 18thcentury point of view. In earlier times, the word art referred to any useful skill. Shoemaking, metalworking, medicine, agriculture, and even warfare, were all once classified as arts. They were equated with what are today called the fine arts painting, sculpture, music, architecture, literature, dance, and related fields. In that broader sense, art was defined as a skill in making or doing, based on true and adequate reasoning. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as military activity against an enemy k) (be) considered the same as something else I) the art of making statues or other solid figures m) more generally (phrase) n) being enough for a purpose o) the process of coming to a conclusion by carefully considering all the facts Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Dramas and power shovels are similar in that A) they are both considered to be fine art B) they are each based on natural things C) both of them are quite fashionable D) they are both produced by people E) neither of them is very common 2. The author tells us that, before the 1700s, people A) were not able to travel in submarines B) were completely unfamiliar with technology C) produced such beautiful tools that they were called art D) placed a much higher value on visual arts E) had a much wider definition for the term art 3. It can be inferred from the passage that warfare A) has become less artistic because of modern military technology B) isn't really so different from skills like shoemaking or literature C) is no longer considered to be an art, though it once was D) has inspired people, through its images, to make great art E) is based, by its very nature, on broadly accepted and true reasoning 1. Though England is often Great Britain, they are technically not the same - in reality, Great Britain is comprised of England, Scotland and Wales. 2. Wilma refuses to eat foods that contain ingredients, so she makes everything she eats from fresh and natural products. 3. Skiing is a difficult activity that requires a lot of and one must practise to get good at it. 4. Travelling gives people lots of experiences and helps them to see things from a/an different than their own by exposing them to the way other peoples live and think. 5. Though individuals' actual salaries vary greatly, the Canadian earns about thirty times as much as the typical Ethiopian. History and biography have several similarities, but they are not synonymous. Both the biographer and the historian search for evidence. They evaluate the information they find to decide if it is factual and relevant. History, however, is the recorded past of human societies it tells the story of nations, wars and movements the whole range of past human activity. Biography deals with a single life story. The historian is interested in facts and events that affect many lives the biographer seeks information that reveals the subject's character and personality. If the subject of a biography is a well-known public figure such as a president of the United States, his life story almost becomes a historical narrative. The life of George Washington, for instance, is a significant segment of American history. But if the subject is a very private person, such as the poet Emily Dickinson, the biography is much less concerned with contemporary historical events. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as any of the parts into which something may be divided k) be about deal with be involved with I) belonging to the same time as something or someone else that is mentioned Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. We learn from the passage that one of the similarities between history and biography is that they both A) deal with well-known public figures B) search for facts that involve the whole of society C) give information based on facts D) deal primarily with the world of fiction E) choose their subject matters very carefully 2. One of the differences between the historian and the biographer is that only A) the historian has to be very careful as to whether the information he's received is factual B) the biographer focuses entirely on the history of an individual C) the biographer must discard material that is irrelevant D) the historian needs to look for proof of his research E) the biographer is interested in the full scope of past human activity 3. Biography and history may become more similar if the biographer is A) writing about the life of a famous American B) investigating the life of a very private person C) revealing facts about him or herself D) interested in historical events in his private capacity E) investigating the life of a well-known public figure This department is only with the mail order side of the business, and doesn't deal with customers directly. 2. Although nobody would ever confuse English and German, there are some between the two languages, owing to the fact that they both belong to the same language family. 3. When you're applying for a job, you should enclose a letter with your CV, highlighting the experience you've had which is most 4. to the job you're applying for. Despite the fact that a large of the population is against genetically modified food, the government continues to allow it to be produced. 5. The manager can't the success of the project until all the facts and figures have been collected and put into a report. ELS 137 During the Middle Ages in Europe, the cat became an object of superstitions and was associated with evil. The animal was believed to have powers of black magic - an assistant to witches and perhaps the embodiment of the devil. People who kept cats were suspected of wickedness and were often put to death along with their cats. Cats were hunted, tortured, and sacrificed. Live cats were sealed inside the walls of houses and other buildings as they were being constructed, in the belief that this would bring good luck. As the cat population dwindled, the disease-carrying rat population increased, a factor that contributed greatly to the spread of epidemics throughout Europe. By the 17th century, the cat had begun to regain its former place as a companion to people and a controller of rodents. Many of the superstitions that appeared during the period of cat persecution, however, are still evident today in the form of such sayings as A black cat crossing your path brings bad luck. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a) a belief which is not based on reason b) (be) connected with something, through ideas c) a supposed special power that is used to harm people or that involves communicating with evil spirits (phrase) d) a woman who is believed to have supernatural powers, usually evil ones e) the expression of an idea or quality in something physical f) evil extreme badness g) (be) caused to suffer great pain h) (be) firmly closed in a place so that it is not possible to get out i) become gradually less diminish j) reach or have an effect on more people or things k) a large number of cases of the same infectious disease at the same time, often in the same area or region I) get something back m) the group of small animals with sharp teeth, which includes rats and mice n) the act of making someone or something suffer because of what they are o) clearly seen apparent 138 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. During the Middle Ages, cat owners were in danger of being A) thought to be evil people B) forced to kill their pets C) perceived as very superstitious D) considered to be the devil himself E) used in the construction of buildings 2. It's obvious from the passage that the widespread epidemics in Europe in the Middle Ages A) were believed to be the result of bad luck B) helped to control the amount of rodents C) caused the cat population to decline dramatically D) were believed to be the work of witches E) were connected to the diminishing numbers of cats 3. It's clear from the passage that during the 17th century, A) people no longer had any superstitions B) cats were no longer considered to be rodents C) the persecution of cats rose to its height D) disease had wiped out most of Europe's cats E) the cats' luck began to change for the better As there are no signs of forced entry to the building, it is that the robbers either had a key, or were let in by somebody. 2. The Plague, a disease also known as the Black Death, was a particularly violent which killed many people in Europe during the Middle Ages. 3. Many people believe that breaking a mirror brings seven years' bad luck, but this is simply and has no basis in fact. 4. The woman who fainted because of the stuffy air in the cinema was immediately carried outside the cinema, where she could get some fresh air, and soon she consciousness. 5. Under the Geneva Convention, it is illegal to prisoners of war - this includes both psychological and physical abuse. ELS 139 If people are satisfied where they are, they will not migrate. Throughout history, people have left their native lands for a variety of reasons religious or racial persecution, lack of political freedom, economic deprivation. The forces that attracted them to new homelands were the opposites of these religious and political freedom, ethnic tolerance, economic opportunity. The leading motive behind migration has always been economic. Overpopulation creates shortages of jobs and food. The natural resources of a region can become exhausted, impelling a whole group of people to migrate. People who are oppressed for any reason will in all likelihood be economically deprived as well. The movement from farm to city is a prime example of migration for economic reasons. During the Industrial Revolution of the 18th and 19th centuries, millions of people left poverty-stricken rural areas for the cities. Even the low-paying, seven-day-a-week jobs in early factories were better than the endless toil and misery of trying to earn a living on the farm. This search for jobs in urban areas has continued to be a leading cause of migration up to the present. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as probably (phrase) k) main major I) very poor m) in or relating to the countryside n) physically hard work o) suffering 140 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the author, all of those who migrate A) try to escape from overpopulation in the area B) are under some form of state persecution C) are members of an ethnic group who seek political freedom D) are attracted by the wealth of their new homeland E) have some sort of dissatisfaction with their native land 2. The main reason that most migrants leave their homelands is that A) they want to practise their religion freely B) their political ideas conflict with those of the state C) they are driven away by the hostile climate of the region D) they think they can make more money elsewhere E) they have become tired from working too hard 3. Country people who moved to the city during the Industrial Revolution A) generally found satisfactory jobs within a week B) usually regretted the rural lives they had left behind C) preferred the most miserable urban jobs to the struggle of rural life D) often returned to the farms where they could at least survive E) often spent a long time looking for work without success 1. The world needs to search for new sources of energy, because fossil fuels, such as coal and 2. The Ottoman Empire, although predominantly Islamic, was well known for its religious oil, are not an unlimited resource and will be at some point. , and allowed people to practise whichever religion they chose. 3. Very few murders take place without a/an - generally the murderer has a reason for wanting to kill his victim. 4. Margot says she'll pick us up at seven o'clock, but she'll be late, as she usually is. 5. The recent economic depression has the company to get rid of sixty workers. The manager said it was the worst thing he has ever had to do, as nobody wanted to see them go. ELS 141 According to the ancient mathematician Hero of Alexandria, Egyptian temples in about 215 BC had devices from which one could get a squirt of holy water for a few small coins. Today's vending machines, however, have their origins in coin-operated dispensers of tobacco and snuff in 18th-century England, and later in the American colonies. These were called honour boxes, because when a coin was inserted, the top opened, laying bare the supply. Customers were on their honour to take their entitled amount and then close the lid so that the next person could pay. The first practical vending machines appeared in the United States in 1888 - chewing gum machines on elevated train platforms in New York City. The machines remained gum and penny-candy vendors until the modern cigarette machine was introduced in 1926. Cigarette machines were the first to return change. The first soft drink machine appeared in 1937. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as tickets, cash, etc., which operates either mechanically or manually f) a tobacco product inhaled through the nose g) high principles or standards of behaviour h) put in i) expose make available (phrase) j) relating to what one is allowed to do or have k) the piece that covers the opening at the top of a container I) raised above the ground m) the correct money given back when more is paid than required n) a beverage without alcohol used for cola, root beer, ginger ale, etc. (phrase) 142 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. In ancient Alexandria, visitors to temples A) didn't have to pay for the holy water they wanted B) had a choice of buying either holy or ordinary water C) weren't allowed to enter without paying a bit of money D) could buy holy water without having to talk to any sellers E) were required to buy holy water before going into the temple 2. It's mentioned in the passage that the first automatic machines for selling tobacco A) let people decide what a fair price should be B) made it very easy for people to pay for the product C) relied on the general honesty of the customers D) had special devices to prevent theft E) were only allowed to be used by honourable people 3. When the modern cigarette machines were first introduced, they were different from other machines selling products in that A) they were able to accept paper money and weren't limited to taking coins B) the customer didn't have to have the exact amount of money to buy from them C) customers could pay in money from other countries, not just the currency of that country D) they were found in train stations and also sold chewing gum to people who wanted it E) it was much easier to use them, as they were more practical than the ones selling gum I have a reusable plastic which I put on tins of cat food to keep it fresh after I've opened the tin. 2. In strict Muslim countries, alcohol is forbidden, so people tend to drink tea, or coffee when they go out. 3. Because flooding is a constant problem, the people in Papua New Guinea live in houses that are raised a few metres above the ground on wooden posts. 4. When I wanted to buy a candy bar with a $100 bill the retailer wouldn't sell it to me as he didn't have enough 5. Since Howard doesn't smoke, I was able to bring twice the amount of cigarettes passengers are to take into the country. ELS 143 In 1956 the 21-year-old Presley created a sensation with his rock 'n' rollstyled Heartbreak Hotel , the first of his 14 records in a row that sold more than a million copies each. Presley's success inspired other country performers to begin singing rock and roll music in the late 1950s. The popularity of Presley also helped to encourage the practice of cover recordings. That is, when new records by black performers began to appear on the hit charts, white singers would record simplified versions of the same songs. The recordings by the white performers received wider distribution and were played on more radio stations than the original recordings. As rock and roll rapidly became the most popular music of the late 1950s, record industry executives became aware that young listeners made up the largest portion of this music's audience. Therefore they employed young, often adolescent, singers to record rock and roll music, and produced such teenage romance songs as Young Love , 16 Candles , and Teen-Age Crush . Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a list of the most popular records (phrase) g) made easier to understand or follow h) a slightly different copy of something i) the act of goods being delivered to shops or businesses for sale to the public j) a person in a company with the power to make decisions k) hire someone I) teenage m) a strong, foolish and short-lived love for someone Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. black musicians and singers became more popular B) his first 14 records sold one million copies altogether C) many country singers changed their style of music D) country music acquired large numbers of new fans E) many black performers began to copy his style 2. One can conclude from the passage that the success of the cover recordings mentioned in the passage demonstrates that A) the original versions were less complex than the re-recorded versions B) the newly recorded versions were better than the originals C) Presley was so popular that even copies of his songs sold well D) Americans in the 1950s preferred black performers to white ones E) the music industry in 1950s America was quite racist 3. One significant result of the rise of rock and roll was that A) the record industry became more youth-oriented B) older versions of songs were adapted for a young audience C) teenagers started to become record industry executives D) older people started to enjoy music made by teenagers E) more radio stations began to play original recordings The captain of the football team his teammates by his own love of the game and as a result, the team started to win more matches. 2. If the business continues to grow at this rate, we'll need to some more staff in a month or two. 3. When the designer Louis Reard created the bikini in 1946, it - in fact, the dancer Micheline Bernardi, who modelled it, received approximately 50,000 fan letters. 4. If you're off work for more than three days the firm requires a letter from your doctor certifying that you've been ill. 5. American income tax forms used to be very complicated, but in 1986, the government released a new, version, which was much easier to understand and fill in. So, although a woman may feel intimidated by a taller male opponent, through the skilful application of throws and holds, she can overpower him. It's easy to see why this sport produces self-confidence and is a great way of releasing tension. The sport of judo was invented in Japan in 1882 to combat bullying in schools. After years of studying other martial arts, Jigoro Kano founded a judo academy in order to discover the most efficient way of deterring his playground enemies. Initially, judo was not accepted by other martial artists, but in 1886, Tokyo's police force held a martial arts tournament and judo techniques scored highly. Recently, judo has been the most widely practised of the martial arts outside China and Japan. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as heaviness g) create a feeling of fear within someone h) gain control over i) create something originally or for the first time j) resist or struggle against oppose k) persecute, oppress, or tease those weaker than oneself I) set up or establish m) productive, with a minimum of wasted effort n) discourage o) one who has hatred or wicked intent towards another p) a contest of skill between a number of competitors q) method of doing something 146 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. We are told in the passage that judo A) was invented by a Japanese policeman B) was designed to fight bullying in Japanese schools C) was developed outside China and Japan D) was never popular with many martial artists E) is the only martial art practised by women 2. We can conclude from the information given in the passage that to be successful at judo, one must A) be bullied by someone much stronger B) be physically stronger than an opponent C) be skilled in the techniques of the sport D) have a lot of tension to release E) be very tall and heavy 3. We can infer from the passage that judo produces self-confidence because in judo A) one can enter international tournaments throughout the year B) the philosophy prepares one to feel strong enough to overpower anyone C) it is possible for one to beat an opponent who is physically stronger D) it is quite easy to apply the techniques one has learnt E) one grows very big physically because of the practice The Supreme Court building on Capitol Hill in Washington DC is a good of Greek revival architecture. 2. Playing the Australian aboriginal musical instrument, the didgeridoo, requires mastery of the of circular breathing, which means simultaneously taking in air through the nose and blowing air out through the mouth. 3. After winning his third chess at the age of 14, Peter Leko became the World Chess Federation's grand master. 4. The Bolshoi Theatre of Opera and Ballet was 5. The pendulum clock was in Moscow in 1919. by a Dutchman, Christiaan Huygens. ELS 147 In fact, about one percent of the total city budget is spent on art. Philadelphia's art museum houses an unparalleled collection from the Middle Ages onward. It has exhibits from all over the world and has a superb collection from the Orient. It is a palatial structure set in the middle of beautiful Fairmourit Park. The museum is the city's number one tourist attraction and you would be forgiven for thinking that this has something to do with its collection of 500,000 paintings. However, the museum's popularity has more to do with another form of art, namely, film. During the film Rocky , the hero - played by Sylvester Stallone - runs up the front steps of the building while he is training for a fight. Tourists arrive in bus loads, but many don't even bother to enter the structure. They come merely for a glimpse of the scene from this Academy Award-winning film. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as splendid and luxurious resembling a palace in size or appearance g) something worth seeing something that fascinates people h) condition of being favoured, widely-known, or widely-liked i) chief male character in a play, poem, or film j) bring into a required physical condition k) make the effort to do something I) building m) entirely, exclusively, only n) a quick look o) a unit of action or segment of a story in a play, film, or television show 148 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. We learn from the passage that the museum is very popular with tourists because A) Sylvester Stallone runs there every day B) it has a wonderful collection of pieces of art from the Orient C) it has over 500,000 paintings D) the steps in front of it were used in a well-known film E) so much money has been spent on it 2. According to the facts in the passage A) the steps of the art museum are regularly used by boxers to train for fights B) Philadelphia's art museum has the largest collection of oriental art in the world C) more tourists visit Philadelphia than any other American city D) the film Rocky was the most expensive film ever made E) for every dollar spent of the city budget, one cent of that dollar is spent on art 3. It's stated in the passage that Philadelphia's art museum is A) too expensive for many of the city's visitors to afford to enter B) overshadowed by the beauty of Fairmount Park C) visited by more tourists than all the other attractions in the city D) the most elaborate and stately building in the entire city E) the former training ground of the film star Sylvester Stallone 1. Her admirers waited outside the hotel for hours hoping to catch a/an of the film star, but she had already left through a side entrance. 2. My friend's grandfather has a/an of Aston Villa match programmes dating from 1920. 3. I got really annoyed when the children didn't even to put their bicycles away. 4. During our visit to Cappadocia, we drove past a/an used in the 1977 science fiction film Star Wars . 5. The Henry Ford Museum houses a collection of all forms of transportation. Among the on display is a very early motor-driven tractor. ELS 149 Prom there, we walked around Park Farm and then a short distance along the Monmouthshire and Brecon Canal until we reached the old miners' path. We took this path and began to ascend the steep hillside. The path led to the summit and to a pillar of rock, known locally as Lonely Shepherd. From this point, we had a wonderful view over the Usk valley. After eating a hearty lunch, we descended back into the valley by the forest trail. Suddenly the black clouds overhead, which had been menacing us with rain all day, rattled with thunder and the heavens opened. As the rain was torrential, we took shelter in an old shepherd's hut. Saturated with rain, we sat round chatting and waiting for the rain to ease, but it continued falling heavily. Having no other option, we continued our hike, looking forward to a warm fire and a hot drink at the end. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as climb down k) a rough track through open country or forests I) frighten scare m) make a series of short, sharp sounds in succession n) (of rain) pouring very rapidly and heavily o) take refuge or protection go into a place which provides refuge or protection (phrase) p) a person who watches sheep q) very wet soaking r) talk in a light, informal manner s) lessen 150 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The significance of the Lonely Shepherd mentioned in the passage was that A) he gave the hikers shelter in his hut B) it was the name of the mountain the hikers climbed C) the hikers had a marvellous view from it D) it was a very steep climb E) it was named after a local shepherd 2. We understand from the passage that the hikers ate their lunch A) on the banks of the Brecon Canal B) in a shepherd's hut where they sheltered from the rain C) in the valley on the way back to their camp D) on the summit of the hill they climbed E) very hastily in order not to be late 3. In the end, the hikers A) arrived at a hut, where they found a warm fire and a hot drink B) had to continue their walk despite the rain C) decided to wait until the torrential rain was over D) made a fire in the forest to dry their wet clothes E) were caught in a thunderstorm while still on the summit 1. The station is quite a/an to walk from here, so you should hire a taxi. 2. Cappadocia has some very strange formations known as fairy chimneys. 3. We from the gale in a cave along the beach. 4. I didn't phone my friend for any specific reason. I just wanted to with someone about nothing in particular. 5. It is too windy at the moment for parachuting, but we are hoping the wind will this afternoon and we will be able to make a parachute jump. ELS 151 No great artist, past or present, has been safe from having his or her work copied by a counterfeiter, and some of the fakes have been so deceptive that only experts have been able to discover them. The number of fake paintings hanging in the world's museums will probably never be known because the museums fear for their reputations if it is learnt that they harbour counterfeit masterpieces . Many museum curators now will accept a painting only after the most careful analysis and testing of its authenticity. The falsifying of paintings and sculpture has been occurring since ancient times. Occasionally people have knowingly purchased copies of art. Wealthy Romans, for instance, demanded and received copies of famous Greek statues. But in the 20th century, the market for fake art sold as being authentic has become very profitable, since artworks are now bought as investments for private collections. a) arrive or occur in large quantities b) a copy of a document, banknote, painting, etc., made in order to deceive people c) according to what is generally thought, but not known for certain d) real truly what it is said to be e) a person who deliberately makes something exactly like something else, in order to deceive f) misleading with the quality to trick people g) the opinion that people in general have about what someone or something is like h) house in one's property, especially people or things wanted by the police i) a very great work of an artist, sculptor, author, etc. j) a person in charge of the objects or works of art in a museum or art gallery k) truly being what a person or thing is reported to be I) a thing that is worth buying because it will be more valuable and thus profitable Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. From the information given in the passage, it is clear that A) there are a large number of fake works of art in existence B) counterfeit masterpieces are extremely rare, except for Rembrandt's paintings C) counterfeiting masterpieces has become harder recently D) wealthy Romans were often deceived and purchased fake copies of Greek statues E) counterfeiters usually sell their products to museums or art galleries 2. It is stated in the passage that A) over half of Rembrandt's paintings are not masterpieces B) all of the prominent painters' work has been copied C) fakes are always easy to detect on examination D) we will soon be