not affected by heart problems 3. From the author's revealing remarks about Dr Ornish's personality, it's possible to say that he A) B) C) D) E) is an extremely greedy person possesses great technical ability for operations strongly believes in self-importance was quite modest about the success of his programme used to be a very popular guru 2. 3. 4. 5. Yoga combines breathing exercises with stretching exercises, which sharply with aerobics, which promotes strenuous exercises and jogging. Claiming that was necessitated by humanitarian interests, the government officials took the prisoners who had been engaged in the hunger strike to hospital. Too much water in the soil caused by over-irrigation and the lack of adequate drainage results in an increasing of salts. This process, called salination, occurs because plants absorb water but leave the salts dissolved in it behind. Because any distraction while driving at high speeds can prove fatal, speed is best at all times. Traditional Chinese and Indian medicine use a/an approach to patients. Instead of only looking at the particular problem a patient is experiencing, they always ask about a patient's lifestyle, diet, level of fitness, and medical history. ELS 229 After five months of difficult work on this project, Cariyle completed the first volume and left it with Mill for criticism. While in Mill's possession, the manuscript was accidentally burned by a maid lighting a fire. Mill was appalled when he discovered the loss and rushed to Carlyle's house nearly frantic with grief. Cariyle did not utter a word of reproach but tried only to console his friend. After Mill had left, he said to his wife, Mill, poor fellow, is terribly cut up. We must endeavor to hide from him how very serious this business is for us. The three volumes of The French Revolution were finally published in 1837. The book was immediately successful. The days of struggle were over, and Cariyle took his place as a leading English writer. His other books followed one another at intervals of two to five years. Cariyle had a few messages that he continually repeated. He affirmed that work of all kinds is dignified and sacred. He thought that men must renounce personal happiness to obtain peace of mind. He believed that the world must be governed by heroes - strong, just men, and consequently he felt that people should put their faith in such men and not in democracy. In his own day, Cariyle exerted a strong influence on other writers, but today few people read Cariyle for what he had to say. The majority read his books for their majestic style and their revealing flashes of his highly individual personality. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as begin a task with urgency (phrase) very large or great of lasting value a book, especially one in a set be in the charge or care of someone (phrase) a handwritten or typed version of a book before it is printed a woman who does cleaning in a hotel or wealthy home g) deeply shocked h) wild and desperate because of fear or worry i) J) k) I) m) n) o) great sorrow say rebuke criticism give comfort or sympathy to a person extremely sad (phrase) write or say that something is true deserving respect p) deserving a special place in society holy q) bring something powerful into use r) very grand s) characteristic of a single person 230 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the story related in the passage, Cariyle reacted to the loss of his manuscript by A) reproaching his friend severely B) comforting his friend C) dismissing the maid D) arguing with his wife E) running frantically to his friend's house 2. After Cariyle had finished his three-volume The French Revolution, he A) left it with his friend John Stuart Mill for proofreading B) was devastated to find out that it had been completely burnt C) fell out with his friend John Stuart Mill D) published several other books E) lost interest in history 3. In the opinion of the author, most people who read Cariyle today A) are forced to do so as part of a history course B) are interested in his valuable theories C) do not believe in his messages D) don't understand why he was such a highly regarded writer E) are students of French literature When Franz Kafka was dying he ordered his friend Max Brod to destroy all of his unpublished Max Brod ignored this and edited and published them instead. 2. Don't worry about tidying up. The will do it after we leave for the theatre. 3. When I heard about the tornado in Austin, lexas, I was 4. We were all waiting for the professor to say something, but he barely with worry until I managed to contact my sister who lives there. Thankfully, she and her family were all fine. . a word. 5. Among the ancient Greeks, the word tyrant was not a term of , but merely meant one who had seized kingly power without the qualification of royal descent. ELS 231 Italian poets have immortalized them in verse. One of Italy's major composers, Ottorino Respighi, enshrined them in two richly descriptive symphonic poems. Books about Rome's fountains published in Italian, French and English have contributed to their fame. The best known is Niccolo Salvi's 18th-century Fountain of Trevi. It is a tradition for visitors to cast small coins into its churning waters, allegedly to ensure their eventual return to Rome - for Christians, and for others, to ensure that their dreams come true. The most imaginative fountain is probably Bernini's Fountain of the Four Rivers. Another by Bernini is the graceful Fountain of the Triton on the Piazza Barberini. In the Piazza della Repubblica is the colossal Fountain of the Naiads. Its charming beauties wrestle with seaborne monsters. The Fountain of the Barcaccia in the Piazza di Spagna was designed like a leaking boat by Bernini's father, Pietro. One of the pleasures of a visit to Rome is a night tour of the city's numerous illuminated fountains. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as happening at some indefinite future time j) resulting from creative ability k) having beauty of form I) of immense size huge m) delightful attractive n) fight another person by holding and throwing them o) coming from the sea p) being many q) be lit up have light directed onto something 232 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. From the details in the passage, it is clear that Rome's fountains A) are not as well-known as those of many other cities B) have been the subject of poetry, music, and prose C) have helped to immortalize their designers D) were all built by the Bernini family E) are the main reason why tourists visit the city 2. The custom of throwing money into the Fountain of Trevi is supposed to A) provide the needy in the city with some money to spend B) help people realize their wishes C) pay for all the other fountains to be illuminated D) give the person immortality E) ensure the person becomes rich 3. According to the passage, one of the joys of a visit to Rome is A) touring around the lit-up fountains at night B) listening to Ottorino Respighi's symphonies C) reading books about the famous fountains D) visiting the famous 18th-century shrines E) strolling around the Piazza Barberini at night Your essay is too You've given lots of details of the service and how it operates, but I want you to be a bit more critical. 2. In the northern English county of Cumbria, they hold annual fairs at which all the farmers gather and take part in sports, including in a traditional style, in which opponents stand chest to chest and take hold of each other. The first man to touch the floor with any part of his body other than his feet loses the match. 3. The cathedral of Notre Dame in Paris has been by Victor Hugo's novel The Hunchback of Notre Dame, written in 1831. This story has made sure that this building will be famous forever. 4. Thousands of people gather to celebrate at midnight on New Year's Eve in the square. Lots of people get overexcited and themselves into the pool even though the water is cold and probably not very clean. 5. The grand church on top of St. Michael's Mount looks most spectacular at night because its tall towers are and stand brightly against the night sky. ELS 233 I Of all Europe's mountain ranges, the jagged and often snow-capped Pyrenees, 435 kilometres long, have functioned most effectively as a barrier to human movement. Unlike the Alps, the Pyrenees have no low foothills or hospitable valleys to ease access into and through their heights. Rather, the Pyrenees rise abruptly from the flanking plains of France and Spain with only steep gorges and steepwalled natural amphitheatres that lead to almost impassable lofty summits. The French peasant's maxim, Africa begins with the Pyrenees, is not without a large measure of truth in emphasizing the historic significance of the Pyrenees as a barrier in the development of Spain. In the words of the American historian Will Durant, Spain's mountains, particularly the Pyrenees, were her protection and tragedy they gave her comparative security from external attack, but hindered her economic advance, her political unity, and her participation in European thought. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as not able to be travelled through or over k) very high I) the highest point, especially of mountains m) a person of low social status who works on a farm or owns a small plot of farmland n) saying of general truth o) observed in relation to something else relative p) make something difficult q) taking part 234 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The passage tells us that the Pyrenees A) B) C) provided easy access for Spain's enemies, making her vulnerable to attacks are for the most part lower than the Alps were first explored by the American historian Will Durant D) E) kept Spain safe from her enemies, but made it difficult for her to develop rise from gentle foothills to lofty peaks 2. According to the passage, no other mountain range in Europe A) B) C) D) E) has prevented passage and access as much as the Pyrenees extends as far as the Pyrenees has been the scene of battle as many times as the Pyrenees has so many high peaks as the Pyrenees remains snow-capped as long as the Pyrenees 3. It is clear that the saying used by French peasants refers to A) B) C) the gentle slopes on the Pyrenees the words of an American historian the lack of development in the land beyond the Pyrenees D) the great economic advancement and political participation on the Spanish side of the Pyrenees E) all of Europe's major mountain ranges 2. 3. 4. 5. Although the Alps rise to a height of 4807 metres, most towns are located in the valleys and on the low , few being over 1800 metres above sea level. The Romans conquered England and Wales, but finding the country neither nor desirable, they did not venture into Scotland. Instead, they built a wall to keep the fierce highland tribes within their rugged, wild and cold homeland. The old Let the buyer beware - meaning that customers buy things at their own risk - has been turned on its head by the American legal system. In America today, a new rule applies, which could be summed up as Let the seller beware . Because the mountains rise on either side of the valley, it receives as little as fifty centimetres of rain annually. Heavy rains, which turn the narrow pass to thick mud in winter, make it to those in motor vehicles and only the bravest traders work their way through, by donkey, along the steep mountain track. ELS 235 She set out to write about the difficult social system that teenagers create among themselves. Her books struck a chord with adolescents who saw in her characters many elements of this system that existed in their own schools and towns. In 1967, while she was still in high school, Hinton published her first book, The Outsiders. The story of confrontation between rival groups of teenagers was immediately successful with critics and young readers, and it won several awards. There was some controversy about the level of violence in the novel and in her other works, but Hinton was praised for her realistic and explosive dialogue. The financial, as well as literary, success of The Outsiders enabled Hinton to continue her education in college. She graduated from the University of Tulsa in 1970. Her other novels for young adults included That Was Then, This Is Now, published in 1971 Rumble Fish, in 1975 Tex, in 1979 and Taming the Star Runner, in 1988. Each of her books featured a cast of characters suffering from society's ills. Young people alienated from their families and from their peers were seen to veer into criminal paths. Several of her books, including The Outsiders and Rumble Fish, were later adapted as motion pictures. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 236 ELS 1. It is clear from the passage that Susan Eloise Hinton A) initially didn't want her readership to know she was female B) wrote purely romantic novels C) was not successful until later in life D) had little formal education due to her financial circumstances E) was a skilled film director as well as a writer 2. From the information in the passage, we could describe the fiction of Susan Eloise Hinton as A) overly sentimental and quite superficial B) featuring youth culture and the problems thereof C) popular with teenagers, but not with critics D) more popular with males than with females E) centred around high society and celebrities 3. The author of the passage emphasizes that teenagers A) became more violent as a direct result of reading Hinton's books B) found Hinton's stories patronizing and humiliating C) preferred Hinton's books to the films made from them D) could identify with the characters and plots of Hinton's books E) prefer to live within accepted social norms of the wider society The government released the economic report on the same day as the royal news in the hope that public interest in the royal family would attention away from the bad news about the economy. 2. One of the most profound influences on teenage lifestyle is pressure from a youngster's to behave in a certain way and wear certain clothing. 3. Ed is a popular councillor because his campaigns for public safety and community events with the local residents, who feel that he understands their concerns. 4. It is not unusual for new immigrants to feel from mainstream society in Germany as a result of culture shock, and so there exist numerous organizations to help foreigners settle in their new homeland. 5. ELS 237 An old Italian proverb says, See Naples and die. It testifies to the enduring attraction of this remarkable city, the third largest city in Italy and one of the most beautiful in the world. Approximately 190 kilometres southeast of Rome, the city is on the north side of the Bay of Naples. The bay juts into the western side of the Italian peninsula with Mount Vesuvius in the background. One of the centres of activity is the Piazza Trento e Trieste near the waterfront. It is flanked by two imposing buildings, the Teatro San Carlo and the Palazzo Reale. The theatre is one of Europe's largest and foremost opera houses, dating from 1737. The palace dates from 1600, originally the home of the viceroys who governed Naples during its period of Hapsburg domination. It now houses the National Library. East of these buildings and overlooking the harbour is the Castel Nuovo, begun in 1279. It houses, among other things, the Naples City Council and the Campania Regional Council. Directly south of the piazza is the Castel dell'Ovo. Built on what was an island now connected with the mainland to form the Porto di Santa Lucia, the castle dates from 1154. To the west of Santa Lucia is the Villa Comunale, a large park with Naples's aquarium. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as stick out above or beyond a surface to protrude g) a piece of land that is almost completely surrounded by water, but still connected to the mainland h) the sight or surface behind the chief objects in view i) the area of a city, such as a harbour or dockyard, alongside a body of water j) have (something) on both sides {phrase) k) impressive in appearance I) most important or best m) facing in a certain direction, a place, etc. 238 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. We learn from the passage that Naples is located A) on Mount Vesuvius B) on an island in the Bay of Naples C) on the coast of Italy D) on the north of Italy E) on the western side of Mount Vesuvius 2. It is clear from the passage that the National Library A) is flanked by two magnificent buildings B) used to be the biggest opera house in Europe C) is on an island now connected with the mainland D) was once the residence of an important official E) is located in the centre of a large park in Naples 3. The proverb See Naples and die. roughly means A) make sure you visit Naples during your life B) Naples is a dangerous city close to a volcano C) make Naples the last place you visit on your trip to Italy D) Naples should be avoided at all costs E) Naples is a city of elderly people who want to die there 1. What does the 2. Never have I seen such a/an He who laughs last, laughs loudest mean. building as the Taj Mahal - its beauty is breathtaking. 3. The natural rock columns of the Giant's Causeway in Northern Ireland out into the Irish Sea. 4. The modern Lowry Museum in Manchester has been built on the of the canal by the old docks, where ships used to be loaded with manufactured goods. 5. Prehistoric and ancient funeral rituals and burial customs, which include burial with supplies of food, ornaments and tools, to the almost universal human belief in the afterlife. ELS 239 Much of her work is based on incidents and scenes from her own life. She was born Kathleen Beauchamp in Wellington, New Zealand, on October 14, 1888, as the daughter of a banker. Katherine Mansfield was her pen name. Her early years were spent in the village of Karori, near Wellington. In 1903, when she was 15, she went to London to study at Queen's College. After three years she reluctantly returned to New Zealand. In 1908 she persuaded her father to provide her with an allowance and allow her to live in England. She had become an accomplished cellist, but she now turned to writing. After a brief unhappy marriage, Mansfield met John Middleton Murry. He was then an Oxford undergraduate, but he was soon to become a well-known critic. Their marriage was successful. Murry wrote She was natural and spontaneous as no other human being I have ever met. Deeply distressed by the death of her only brother, Leslie, in World War I, and already suffering from poor health, she went to the French Riviera in 1916. There she began to write the stories for which she is best known, tales of her childhood in New Zealand. She died of tuberculosis in a sanatorium in France on January 9, 1923. In her career, Mansfield strove for a pure style that would express simple reality. Her writing is sensitive, reflecting subtle variations in mood. Not until 1920, with Bliss and Other Stories, did she obtain recognition, though. After her death, Murry brought out several volumes of her writings that had not previously been published. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 240 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, Kathleen Mansfield had the ability A) to play several instruments well B) to understand human nature C) to criticize her own works heavily D) to organize sightseeing tours E) to write in a complicated interwoven style 2. It is clear from the details in the passage that Kathleen Mansfield's father A) was satisfied with her progress as a cellist B) wanted his daughter to travel C) was killed while fighting in World War I D) supported her financially while she lived in England E) was against her marriage to Murry 3. The author makes it clear in the passage that while writing her best known stories, Kathleen Mansfield A) was living in Karori, near Wellington B) was unhappily married C) made her living as a cellist D) was heavily in debt E) was not very well physically 1. Not only is Richard Gere a great actor, but he also has other skills, being a/an composer and pianist. 2. You must have 3. In addition to paying his son's room and board at Oxford University, Finley gave him a small monthly 4. eyesight to be able to do such delicate needlework. so that he could buy whatever he wanted. Janine had been miserable for weeks worrying about her father. Now that he has come home from the hospital, it is lovely to hear her natural, unforced and laugh again. 5. American country music was adapted from European folk music, but differences in style reflect ethnic influences from Latin and African sources. Although he is one of the most popular saints honoured by Christians, very little is actually known about him. He lived during the 4th century in Lycia, a province on the southwest coast of Asia Minor. Tradition says he was born in Patara, a seaport, and travelled to Egypt and Palestine as a young man. Eventually he became bishop of the church at Myra. During the period of the persecution of Christians by Emperor Diocletian, he was imprisoned but was released by Diocletian's successor, Constantine the Great. By the 6th century his burial shrine was well known at Myra. In 1087 his remains were moved to Bari, Italy, which became a crowded pilgrimage centre. Devotion to him spread throughout the Christian world, and thousands of churches throughout Europe were named after him. His feast day was set on December 6. The transformation of St. Nicholas into Santa Claus began in Germany, where he was called Kriss Kringle, derived from Christkindle, meaning Christ child , and he became permanently associated with the Christmas season and gift-giving. From there his legend spread to France, where he was called Pere Noel. In the Dutch colony of New Amsterdam - now New York City - he was called Sinter Claes, which easily became Santa Claus. As Christmas became more widely celebrated, the legend grew. In 1823, Clement C. Moore wrote A Visit from St. Nicholas , portraying Santa Claus riding in a sleigh drawn by eight tiny reindeer , the same mode of travel he uses in Scandinavia. The first drawing of him that resembles today's Santa Claus was a cartoon by Thomas Nast that appeared in Harper's Weekly in 1866. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 242 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Although Santa Claus is normally drawn with the snow of Northern Europe around him, it is clear from the passage that St. Nicholas A) came from a coastal region in Asia Minor B) never saw snow in his life C) didn't have the opportunity to travel much D) wasn't very popular with Christians E) liked warmer places better 2. The passage describes how St. Nicholas A) died in Bari in Italy B) gave out presents to celebrate Jesus's birthday C) was imprisoned by Constantine the Great D) spent some time in captivity for his beliefs E) went on a pilgrimage to a burial shrine in Myra 3. According to the passage, the name Santa Claus A) started to be used in Italy during the 11th century B) is the French word for Father Christmas C) is Lycian for St. Nicholas D) is derived from the Dutch immigrant name for St. Nicholas E) was first used in a cartoon by Thomas Nast In the film of the fairy tale Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , Happy is a fat, little dwarf who laughs all the time. 2. Unlike the other Canadian , Quebec has a very French culture and a form of French known as Quebecois is the main language spoken there. 3. The international community came to the rescue of the Kosovans who suffered for their beliefs under Serbian rule. 4. In the last month of every Islamic lunar year more than iwo million Muslims make the great to Mecca. 5. The Whalley Range School in central Manchester has undergone a/an from a poorly performing school into a centre of excellence. ELS 243 Paul's introduction to music was through his father, who was the founder of Jim Mac's Jazz Band. It was shortly after his mother's death from breast cancer in 1956 that McCartney immersed himself in learning to play the guitar. His mastery of early rock 'n' roll songs impressed his friends and created an opportunity for him to join John Lennon in a local group that would later become The Beatles. McCartney, who is most famous for playing bass in the band, composed many memorable songs, including Yesterday (1965), Eleanor Rigby (1966), Sgt. His willingness to sign autographs, pose for pictures, and give interviews caused the mass media to dub him the cute Beatle . That title, combined with the prevalent early 1960s belief that the rock genre of music lacked artistic merit, often obscured McCartney's contribution to the music of the Beatles. His expertise in harmony and melody complemented Lennon's love of wordplay and basic rock 'n' roll and helped create many of the vocal and bass lines that have become the trademarks of the Beatles' musical style. As half of the Lennon-McCartney songwriting team, he created some of the best-known popular music of the 20th century. McCartney was a member of The Beatles from 1962 to 1970 , the founder of Wings, which performed from 1971 to 1980 and has, in more recent years, enjoyed success as a solo recording artist, a composer of classical music, a painter, a poet, and a businessman. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 244 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The author explains that the press nicknamed Paul McCartney the cute Beatle because A) of his skill in playing the bass guitar B) he eagerly responded to public attention C) he was younger than the other members of the band D) he was clever to avoid cameramen E) he was from the northwest of England 2. It is clear from the passage that it was as a direct result of a tragedy that Paul McCartney A) concentrated on learning to play the guitar B) left the Beatles and formed the new band Wings C) joined his father's band, Jim Mac's Jazz Band D) parted with John Lennon and left the Beatles E) found success as a solo artist 3. According to the passage, although Paul McCartney started out in rock music A) he was more successful in other forms B) he found success in several other areas as well C) he was a classically trained musician D) all songs for the Beatles were written by John Lennon E) he went on to become a jazz musician It always makes me sad when I hear of old people whose family can't be bothered to visit or look after them. 2. The photographer got my daughter to 3. Margaret Thatcher, a former prime minister of the UK, was with her skis. She looked like a movie star. the Iron Lady by the press because of her inflexible approach to opposition even from within her own party. 4. I'm not keen on futuristic fiction or, indeed, any films or books in the science fiction 5. Roald Dahl wrote his children's stories in a small hut in his garden where he could get completely his work. ELS 245 The arrow dates from the Stone Age. The ancient Chinese flew kites. The early inhabitants of Australia invented the boomerang, the blades of which they carved in the shape of an airfoil. As early as the Middle Ages, men of scientific mind prophesied human flight. About 1250, Roger Bacon, an English friar, suggested the orthopter, a machine that flaps its wings like a bird. He also conceived the balloon, proposing a hollow globe filled with ethereal air or liquid fire. Some 250 years later, the great Italian artist and scientist Leonardo da Vinci studied the flight of birds. About 1490, he drew sketches for flying machines, also of the orthopter type. Leonardo made drawings of a propeller and a helicopter. An Italian monk, Francesco de Lana, in 1670 proposed a vacuum balloon. Four spheres, from which air had been exhausted, were to support a car equipped with oars and a sail. He overlooked the phenomenon of atmospheric pressure, however, which would have crushed the spheres. Not until a hundred years later was the first balloon flown successfully in public. In 1783, J. Etienne and Joseph M. Montgolfier inflated a big paper balloon with hot which rose 6,000 feet. a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) i) j) k) I) m) n) o) p) q) r) Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 246 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, over 500 years before the first balloon flight A) boomerangs were the only means of air travel for men B) men didn't even know how to fire arrows C) Leonardo da Vinci studied the flight of birds and drew flying machines D) successful orthopters had already been transporting people by air E) knowledgeable men believed successful flights would be achieved one day 2. It is clear from the passage that Leonardo da Vinci A) had considered the possibility of air travel in some depth B) concentrated more on science than on art C) had ignored the existence of air pressure D) had made detailed studies of how a boomerang returns to its thrower E) managed to build the first helicopter but it did not fly 3. We learn from the passage that J. Etienne and Joseph M. Montgolfier A) ignored the presence of atmospheric pressure B) succeeded in a type of flight conceived several centuries earlier C) made many drawings, but never built a successful machine D) were the first men to imagine air balloons which could rise in the sky E) did not think helicopters could ever be successful As John lives only a mile from Heathrow Airport in London, the airplanes above his house every few minutes. 2. As the doctor desperately attempted to rescue people from the burning hospital, he accidentally got his arm too close to the helicopter and one of its sliced his arm straight off. 3. The kestrel, a type of falcon, hovers in flight with its tail fanned out and its wings vigorously as it watches the ground for small animals, such as mice. 4. The police inspector the fact that, although the suspect was seen going into work and leaving work, he could have left his office at any time during the day. 5. I slept on an airbed at my aunt's, which took me quite some time to using a small foot pump. ELS 247 Tourists originated when large numbers of middle class people began to join the more wealthy aristocratic travellers. As societies became wealthier, and people lived longer, it became more and more likely that lower-middle class and middle class people steadily employed would retire in good health and with significant savings. A tourist can usually be seen as clearly out of place in his current surroundings, so he is not confused with other travellers. The term tourist is tied to the activity of taking a tour or sightseeing. It is not limited to travelling, but used as a description of a person who enters a situation or culture, for a brief time, requiring knowledge that he does not have. The tourist can be interested - among other things - in the new place's culture or its nature. Wealthy people have always travelled to distant parts of the world, not, for any special purpose, but simply for travelling as an end in itself to see great buildings or other works of art to learn new languages and to taste new cuisines. Organized tourism is now a major industry around the world and many national economies are now heavily reliant on tourism. The term tourism is sometimes used in an uncomplimentary manner, implying a shallow interest by tourists in general in the societies and natural wonders they visit. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as get two things mixed up be mistaken for (phrase) g) lasting fora short time h) faraway i) desirable, even though you may achieve nothing by it (phrase) j) (of a region, country, or culture) characteristic style of cooking k) dependent on something for support i) expressing disapproval m) suggest something without actually saying it n) not involving serious or careful thought 248 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, a tourist A) has to be rich in order to relax during the holiday B) usually carries out business abroad C) is usually studying the local language D) isn't normally obvious among natives E) visits places with the aim of enjoying them 2. It is clear from the passage that tourism A) is not favoured by the rich people of the place being visited B) includes business travel and foreign studies as well C) makes up a significant percentage of the economies of some countries D) encourages other types of trade between nations E) helps to eliminate cultural differences between nations 3. It is mentioned in the passage that A) only those who have just retired with a lot of money make good tourists B) tourists normally prepare in advance to feel at ease within the foreign countries they visit C) tourists are not welcome in most countries D) tourism costs some countries a lot of money E) most tourists are not interested in communicating with natives other than on a superficial level 1. I felt a bit in the restaurant in my nurse's uniform, but i didn't have time to change before meeting Heather on her birthday. 2. Animal activists, who are as much against keeping pets as they are against hunting, should not be 3. animal lovers, who care for their pets lovingly. Reporting a business's progress should not be a/an but should provide useful information for improving productivity or service quality. 4. Rice and pulses - dried beans, lentils, and chickpeas - cooked with fish, chicken, or pork, are basics in Spanish 5. There are plenty of opportunities for in the hotel, such as tennis and golf. ELS 249 But in the last generation, new strains of bacteria have emerged that are resistant to these wonder drugs. One of the main causes of resistance is the overuse of antibiotics. That includes drugs given to commercially raised livestock, and this can lead to serious threats to human health if the animal is diseased. Hence, organic farming - which means raising animals and crops without using drugs or chemical fertilizers - is gradually becoming popular. New Horizons is such a farm in the American state of North Carolina. This farm is raising meat without the use of chemicals. Eleven-year-old Chance Lorraine likes to show visitors around. Here, on 20 hectares, his parents raise organic vegetables, pigs, Black Angus beef cattle, and chickens. There are also water buffalo. But what really sets New Horizons apart from commercial livestock farms are three metal silos near the pastures. We keep feed in all three of these. That's cow feed, that's chicken feed, and the other one is pig feed, says Chance. The feed is special because of what it doesn't have no growth hormones, no animal by-products, no chemicals against worms, and no antibiotics. The animals in the field that eat this feed eventually end up in cold storage at the New Horizons Farm store. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 250 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, over the last fifty years or so A) bacteria have developed that are not affected by today's antibiotics B) there has been a sharp increase in organic farming across the world C) North Carolina has become the centre of organic farming D) a huge number of antibiotics have been developed E) the Lorraines have gradually changed to organic farming methods 2. The author states that one reason for the growth in organic farming is A) higher productivity from livestock B) cost savings over intensive farming methods C) the government support provided for private enterprises D) fears over the consequences of excessive use of antibiotics E) an epidemic of worms infesting livestock 3. According to the description in the passage, the food for livestock at New Horizons A) contains animal products for added protein B) is treated with antibiotics C) contains medicine to treat worm infestations D) promotes animal growth through the use of hormones E) is totally natural 1. I'll leave you with our receptionist now, and she'll you our offices, canteen, and other facilities. 2. It is important to paint exterior walls with weather paint, such as an oil- based type. 3. There is currently a national shortage of social workers , high salaries are now being offered for this kind of work. 4. There have been advances in telecommunications in the last century. 5. He grew mushrooms in his garage as a hobby before he started growing them It figures prominently in school syllabuses history departments in universities are wellpopulated and publishers' lists are crowded with historical titles. Why. Because it is widely believed that the modern world cannot be properly conceived without a knowledge of the past as a historian once said, the most significant benefit of studying history is discovering the origin of things present which are to be found in things past for a reality is never better understood than through its causes. Besides this, the study of history can help men predict the future on the basis of the past, often by reasoning about parallel events. However, very frequent appeals to the past as a means of solving problems in modern society can sometimes be misleading. Thus, when studying history, men shouldn't expect past events to repeat themselves infallibly, nor should they try to predict the future merely on the basis of very fragmentary evidence, underestimating the genuinely radical changes in society over the years. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as understand g) deciding logically (phrase) h) the same in important points i) method j) giving the wrong idea k) certainly I) only m) incomplete n) information that helps prove something o) undervalue p) extreme 252 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The main use of studying history, expressed in the passage, is that A) it enables us to discover the reasons underlying present events B) people can get knowledge about their ancestors, from whom they descended C) decision makers can plan the future by taking past events as examples D) people can draw lessons from past events so as not to make the same mistakes E) it can help solve the problems of modern society 2. The writer warns that when applying to the past for the solution of present or future events A) one has to be careful to choose events in the past which are very similar to the present situation B) one should have a good knowledge of both past and present C) one has to pay special attention to whether the sample event is in the distant or the near past D) one shouldn't ignore the essential changes in society over the years E) the differences between the interpretations of various historians should be taken into consideration 3. According to the passage, there is an agreement in the community that A) the study of history should be given more importance in school syllabi B) history departments in universities are satisfactory in terms of number of students C) future events can't be predicted on the basis of very fragmentary historical information D) the events in our modern world can't be compared with those in the past E) a complete education can only be achieved by the study of history A number of events made us wonder if this could be more than just coincidence. 2. Such is the respect for Atatürk that there is now a statue of him situated in every town in Turkey. 3. I don't know why he's so angry. I 4. If you don't set the video-timer asked him if I could help. , we won't be able to record the programme. 5. According to the law of gravity, what is in the air must come to the ground. ELS 253 However, we don't realize the damage we give to our teeth if we don't know the proper way of brushing. Experts state that the way we brush our teeth has a great influence on our dental health. In Finland, for instance, the Academy of General Dentistry has warned against wielding your toothbrush in what it called the death-grip - that is, clenching the brush in the palm and scrubbing your teeth vigorously. Such overzealous cleaning can cause the gums to recede and damage the exposed roots of the teeth. Researchers in Finland studied one brushing technique that can help you exert less pressure grip the brush as you would a pen - between your thumb and first two fingers. Done correctly, this method can cause less damage to the gums and clean as effectively as the standard grip. Select a brush with soft bristles and use short, gentle, circular strokes. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as rub something hard to clean it g) strongly and energetically h) too much enthusiasm and energy i) pink flesh round the top and bottom of the mouth in which the teeth are fixed j) go back from original position k) uncovered and unprotected I) part of something which grows beneath the surface m) use power in an action n) hold firmly o) not hard bends or changes shape easily p) short hairs attached to a brush q) round or curved r) regular and repeated movements 254 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. It's stated in the passage that A) the standard grip is the most effective way of holding the brush B) teeth should be brushed regularly in order to prevent the gums from receding C) when the bristles of a toothbrush are too soft, they can't clean the teeth effectively D) when done too frequently, brushing may do harm to teeth E) you'll hurt the gums of your teeth if you scrub them strongly 2. It's advised, in the passage, that in order to obtain better results one should A) consult an expert for the proper way of tooth-brushing B) take great care of the teeth for complete well-being C) brush the teeth gently, moving the brush in circles D) not exaggerate the frequency of tooth-brushing E) hold the brush in the palm and move it slowly up and down, without pressing the teeth a lot 3. According to the results of the research carried out in Finland, A) holding the brush like a pen reduces the harm done to the gums B) most people are not aware of the proper way to brush their teeth C) people feel great happiness when their teeth are well-cared for D) people in general are quite careless about their teeth E) if you hold the brush between your thumb and first two fingers, you'll do no harm to your teeth 1. This house is in a rather position and may be damaged easily if there are strong winds. 2. He says he isn't going bald, but his hair seems to be 3. He argued his opinion so more every day. that many people were forced to agree with him. 4. I don't think that watching television while we have guests is really the way to behave. 5. This bed is so that I fall asleep almost the second I lie down. ELS 255 His discovery stimulated other scientists to search for new fibres, and it was not long before several more were produced, but all of them had as their starting-point some natural organic material, such as cellulose, casein, etc. It is only fairly recently that man has succeeded in synthesizing new fibres from inorganic materials. Everyone has heard of nylon, and scarcely one of us can say he doesn't use something made from this product every day. But nylon was the first of an ever-lenğthening list of new synthetic fibres. Now hardly a year passes without some new fibre making its appearance and some unfamiliar name finding its way into our everyday speech. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as always getting longer not having an end 256 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. It doesn't date far back, according to the passage, that A) a fine thread was obtained by unwinding the cocoon of a silk-worm B) a Frenchman produced a silk-iike fibre C) man discovered certain natural organic materials from which they produced fine threads D) man began to produce fibres entirely artificially E) organic materials took the place of inorganic ones in the production of fibres 2. Synthetic fibres A) were first produced by the Chinese B) are produced from organic materials C) are growing in number almost every year D) have been given similar names E) are usually longer than natural fibres 3. According to the writer's statement, A) hardly anyone today seems too eager to use anything made from nylon B) synthetic fibres were much more popular when they were first produced than they are today C) nylon products are used in everyday life by almost everybody D) artificial materials are used more than natural ones E) people are unfamiliar with the names of many of the synthetic materials 1. Make sure that you the electric cable properly before you use it. It's dangerous to leave it wrapped up like that. 2. I hate flowers. They always look so fake to me. 3. She has a great problem styling her hair because it's so 4. The list of countries whose native cultures are being gradually swallowed up by American cultural influence is 5. If you mix fruit with yoghurt and then freeze it, it's as delicious as ice cream and not nearly so fattening. ELS 257 The Japanese gardening ideal is not an arrangement of flowers and plants, formal or informal, but the creation of a miniature landscape in which the designer's view of nature is expressed in a small space and on a small scale. Art is hidden by art. Trees and bushes, rocks and ponds, little singing streams winding round tiny islands all these refresh the spirit with their gentle naturalness, but they have all been carefully positioned by the landscape garden designer. Often a tea pavilion is a graceful part of the scene, and here the ancient Japanese tea ceremony may still be held. Traditionally, to view the moon from a tea pavilion will bring you a sense of peace and well-being, or even the ability to write poetry. Japanese gardens are full of ancient tradition and symbolic meaning, and many date back as far as AD 600. Streams run from east to west because east is the source of purity and west of impurity. Turtles symbolize long life, so a turtle-shaped rock is always popular. A pine tree twisted in the shape of a crane, a bird that mates for life, represents good luck and lasting companionship. The golden chrysanthemum, sacred symbol of the Imperial family, is cultivated in many shades and forms. The delicate blossom of the cherry tree symbolizes the speed with which life fades, while the cherry fruit stands for loyalty. And a cherry blossom party in the spring is a very lively occasion. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as hills, trees, rivers, etc. c) to a small degree (phrase) d) move or go along with something that has curves and bends e) very small f) give energy back to g) small ornamental building h) pleasing and attractive elegant i) health and happiness j) have existed since (phrase) k) cleanness being without evil I) wind round and round m) not ending n) holy respected o) take care of grow p) different degree of a colour q) flowers on a tree before the fruit comes r) lose colour or strength s) represent symbolize (phrasal verb) t) faithfulness 258 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The main characteristic of the Japanese garden is that A) it is a small version of nature, reflecting the designer's views B) it is designed beside natural rivers, streams, or ponds C) it is regarded as a sacred place and treated accordingly D) it always contains exactly the same elements E) it is usually smaller than a European garden 2. Most of the things in a Japanese garden A) are casually positioned, out of the effort to make them seem natural B) are made up of certain kinds of flowers C) are natural rather than artificial D) symbolize something according to Japanese beliefs E) are arrangements of flowers made in a formal way 3. It's stated in the passage that A) keeping turtles - symbols of long life - in Japanese garden ponds is very popular B) in most Japanese gardens, you can see cranes, birds representing good luck C) there is usually a tea pavilion in the gardens of the Japanese poets D) the golden chrysanthemum is a flower which can be used only by the Imperial family E) Japanese gardens even contain artificial streams, ponds, and islands 1. She really wants to be a ballet dancer, but I don't think she is enough. She dances more like an elephant. 2. The three colurs blue, white and red, in the French flag liberty, equality and fraternity. 3. There is nothing better than a cup of tea to you after a long day's work. 4. If the government were more concerned for our , they would do something about the air pollution in this city. 5. Have you got this sweater in a lighter . This one is too dark for me. ELS 259 The history of Borobodur begins many centuries ago at the end of the eighth and the beginning of the ninth century. During that time, over 10,000 labourers worked to create this huge mountain temple with its carved walls, its terraces, and its stupas. But not long after the temple was built, the civilization that built it left the area. For the next 700 years the temple was almost forgotten. Ash from the nearby mountain covered it and thick trees grew over it. It wasn't until 1814 that people became interested in the temple again. It was in that year that the British governor of Java ordered the army to clear away the jungle that covered the temple. For a couple of months the soldiers chopped and dug, carrying away the rubbish and revealing the beauty of the ancient temple once again. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as cut into a design, usually wood or stone g) a large pile or dome of earth or other material built in memory of the Buddha or of a Buddhist saint h) powder that remains after burning something i) person who controls an area or colony j) cut down, usually with an axe k) cause to be visible or known 260 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The recovery of the temple A) has been delayed due to the eruption of the nearby volcano B) would not be possible without the work of 700 Indonesians C) is being carried out by an international team of experts D) involved the digging out of some of the world's most beautiful art treasures E) has taken since 1814 to be completed 2. In 1814 A) it took the army two months to make the temple visible by clearing the jungle B) a new governor was appointed to the British colony of Java C) the British started to take an interest in Indonesian history D) Java became a colony of the British Empire E) the British governor instructed the Javanese people to clear the jungle 3. In the construction of the temple A) the walls were carved out of the mountain B) 700 years passed before it was finally completed C) many workers died because of the dangerous mountainous terrain D) work was constantly interrupted so that the Buddhist labourers could meditate E) more than ten thousand workers were involved 1. Lifting up the mat in his cell the entrance to the tunnel he had dug to escape by. 2. My brother brought some beautiful wooden ornaments back from Jamaica with him. 3. The statue was made by pouring metal into a mould. 4. During the war in Iraq many irreplacable cultural were looted from the Baghdad museum. 5. I'm just going outside to some wood for the fire. ELS 261 This new challenge and opportunity might soon collide with the reality of being in a new culture, something known as culture shock. Culture shock has been viewed as a psychological reaction or a generalized disorientation and trauma experienced by a person learning to cope with a new culture and circumstances. It is a normal and natural part of living in a foreign cultural environment. Culture shock doesn't mean that one is adjusting poorly - it means that one is undergoing a normal reaction. However, the way that one manages culture shock can have important implications for the success of one's adaptability to the new culture. The psychological reaction in coping with culture shock includes emotional and cognitive components, as well as the effects of social changes. These changes also result in a psychophysiological reaction to the experience of another culture. The changes caused by culture shock include fatigue, role stress and identity loss, excessive concern with cleanliness, and a fear of danger from food and water. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as related to the process of learning showing knowledge g) a part of something which helps to make it complete 262 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. When someone is exposed to a new culture A) he can find that the challenge is not as great as he believed B) it often does not live up to his expectations C) he becomes very homesick, especially for his favourite foods D) it isn't at all unusual to experience culture shock E) the necessary adjustment takes a long time 2. It is stated that A) if one doesn't adjust quickly to the new culture, one probably never will B) successful adjustment to the new culture depends on how one handles the culture shock C) culture shock is a sign that a person is not capable of adapting to life abroad D) culture shock may bring about social changes which are difficult to cope with E) people with psychological or emotional disorders are most likely to suffer from culture shock 3. One of the symptoms of culture shock is that A) one becomes unable to think logically B) your emotions start going from one extreme to another without warning C) people lose their appetites and so become undernourished D) one tends to start believing one is physically ill when one is not E) the person may be suspicious of what he eats and drinks When he was a child he a number of major operations to enable him to walk properly. 2. 3. He enjoys dangerous sports, such as climbing and parachuting, because he sees them as more of a than other, safer activities. The basic of any language course will be the four skills of reading, writing, speaking, and listening. 4. The loss of that firm's order has a number of serious for our company's future. 5. The medicine which the doctor prescribed was so strong that it left her with a strange feeling of ELS 263 One psychologist is engaged in vocational guidance and spends his day talking to high school students, studying their academic records and their test scores and, from these, showing the student how to clarify his own ideas about his future training and occupation. Another spends his day studying delayed reactions in goldfish or the navigation system of bats. Other psychologists are assisting in the diagnosis of neurotic patients, doing research on the childhood experiences that contribute to neurosis, or taking part in combined research on the effects of tranquilizers. But all such disparate activities have this in common the methods used all derive from the same fundamental training in the procedures and conceptions of academic psychology, and the worker is either putting those conceptions to practical use, or trying to improve on them - or both. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as identification of what is wrong, especially of illnesses g) drug used to calm and lessen anxiety h) dissimilar clearly different i) develop from come from (phrase) j) idea 264 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Although vastly different in their practices, A) vocational guidance psychologists have the same aim as those researching neuroses B) the results obtained from human and animal research show many similarities in psychological terms C) psychologists in all fields are essentially trained in the same way D) neurotic patients and those addicted to tranquilizers all had unstable childhoods E) all psychologists took up their occupation for the same reasons 2. It is stated that some psychologists A) deal with humans while others focus on animals B) work with doctors doing medical research into drugs C) are employed at high schools to study the students' performances D) use the results gained from animals to analyze human behavioral patterns E) disapprove of the fundamental training they received 3. The psychologist working in the field of vocational guidance A) has usually also trained as a teacher B) has nothing in common with other psychologists C) is responsible for students' future success or failure D) assists students in their career choice E) helps students to improve their test scores 1. Before the rise of our present technology, the of a ship relied largely on the stars and the sun plus a few simple instruments. 2. Modern cultural studies courses generally several different subjects, ranging from literature to music to pop culture. 3. His of how to set up and run a business are entirely different from