praised enthusiastically i) move or progress more slowly than someone (phrase) j) a highly intelligent, creative, or talented person k) be completely involved in something I) something that distracts the attention and makes one think about something else m) the ability to bear an unpleasant or painful situation calmly and patiently n) being extremely difficult and tiring 336 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to Laszlo Polgar, A) a great talent for something appears in only one area per person B) it is easy to create geniuses in chess C) children should be first trained in sports in order for them to be geniuses D) all three of his daughters were born to be geniuses E) one can become a genius if specially trained starting from a young age 2. The passage tells us that Sofia Polgar A) was considered by her father to have the most talent B) was the youngest person in chess history to have won the rank of grandmaster C) was the second-ranked woman chess player in the world D) began learning the game at a later age than her two sisters E) did not study chess for as many hours as her sisters 3. It is clear from the passage that the sisters were also given physical training A) so that they would excel at other sports B) to provide a change from their routine and to build stamina C) to make sure the girls got some fresh air D) as part of the official school programme E) regularly for about five hours a day 1. At twenty-six miles, marathon races test as well as strength and physical fitness. 2. Michael started out in the army as a private soldier but now he has risen to the high 3. The speeds achieved by female downhill ski racers have not of general. those of male skiers yet, but they are improving all the time and they could catch up with them in the years to come. 4. Progress in treating tropical diseases advancement in treating western diseases, primarily for financial reasons. 5. The soldiers played football as a/an from their strict military training. ELS 337 Leaving Turkey, the Tigris touches the northeastern border of Syria and then flows southeastward across Iraq. In Iraq it is joined by tributaries from the east - principally the Great Zab, the Little Zab, and the Diyala. The Euphrates, west of the Tigris, runs in the same general direction. In ancient times, the two rivers had separate mouths. Now they meet in a swamp in southern Iraq and form a single stream, the Shaft al-'Arab, which flows into the head of the Persian Gulf. The fertile region between the Tigris and the Euphrates was called Mesopotamia by the ancient Greeks, and it was here that the earliest known civilization flourished. The Tigris was the great river of Assyria. The ancient city of Assur, which gave its name to Assyria, stood on its banks, as did Nineveh, Assyria's splendid capital. Much later the Macedonian general Seleucus built his capital city Seleucia on the Tigris, and across the river from Seleucia the Parthian kings built Ctesiphon. The chief cities on the river today are Baghdad, the capital of Iraq, and Mosul, farther upstream. River steamers make regular trips between Basra, a modern port on the Shatt al-Arab, and Baghdad. Since ancient times the people of Mesopotamia have depended on the water of the two rivers to irrigate their hot, dry land. The soil itself is largely a gift of the rivers, which deposit tremendous quantities of silt on their lower course. The shallow Persian Gulf is being filled at the rate of about 20 metres a year, and ruins of cities that were once gulf ports now lie far inland. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as having nutrients and able to sustain abundant plant life g) be active or successful develop quickly and strongly h) magnificent and impressive fine in appearance i) a ship powered by steam j) supply land with water in order to help crops grow k) very great in quantity I) fine sand and mud which is carried along by a river m) (of water) only a short distance from top to bottom not deep 338 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. From the information given in the passage aboui the Tigris and Euphrates, we learn that A) the Euphrates is shorter but deeper than the Tigris B) each river once had its own outlet to the open sea C) the Euphrates is longer and of more commercial use D) the rivers have always joined near the Persian Gulf to form a swamp E) more ancient cities were situated on the banks of the Euphrates than the Tigris 2. According to the passage, the Tigris River A) has been fought over by the Assyrians, the Macedonians, the Parthians and the Iraqis B) flows into Lake Van in eastern Turkey C) has, since the dawn of civilization, provided sites for important settlements D) has been overused for irrigation, resulting in large swamps E) is only navigable by small boats 3. It is clear from the passage that the people living in the area between the Tigris and the Euphrates A) are direct descendants of the Assyrians B) are generally nomads C) live mainly on fish D) live high up in the mountains E) use the river water for agriculture The capital of Azerbaijan, Baku is built among the hills that the Bay of Baku on the Caspian Sea. 2. In the American state of Louisiana, there is a huge fifty miles wide and stretching along the western side of the mighty Mississippi River. In this vast wetland, people travel in flat-bottomed boats and build their houses on stilts. 3. The Missouri River, which is considered a/an of the Mississippi, is almost as long as the Mississippi and nearly as wide. 4. You can't dive into the water here because it is too 5. On his farm, water is pumped from underground to the land in summer, when there is hardly any rain for the crops. ELS 339 Almost nothing is known of his life. He was probably born in Blackburn in Lancashire, England. While still a boy, he became a carpenter and spinner in Standhill, a village nearby. At that time Lancashire was the centre of England's manufacture of cotton goods. The industry was still confined to workers' homes, however, and the cards, spinning wheels and looms were operated by hand. It is said that an accident gave Hargreaves the idea for his spinning jenny. In his crowded cottage, which served him both as home and workshop, he was experimenting with spinning two threads at one time. His experiments were unsuccessful, however, because the horizontal spindles allowed the threads to fly apart and become tangled. After his daughter Jenny overturned the experimental machine and its wheel continued to revolve with the spindles in a vertical position, it occurred to Hargreaves that a machine with spindles in this position might be successful. He proceeded to build a spinning machine, probably in 1764, that would spin eight threads at the same time. He called his new invention, after his daughter, a spinning jenny. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a single strand, or several strands twisted together, used for knitting or making cloth (two separate words) e) turning quickly around a central point f) kept in a place and not able to leave g) an iron-toothed instrument for combing wool, flax or other material h) a machine in which yarn or thread is woven into a fabric i) parallel to the horizon j) a pin or rod in a spinning wheel for twisting thread k) knotted together or intertwined in a confused mass I) turn over to upset, especially by accident m) turn round to move around a center n) at 90 degrees to the horizon standing or pointing upwards o) do an action based on something before 340 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, James Hargreaves' A) birthplace was certainly Lancashire, England B) family included notable people in Standhill C) life has been the subject of history books D) early life remains largely unknown E) invention had little impact on industrialization 2. It is clear from the passage that, reportedly, the inspiration for Hargreaves' invention A) resulted from an accidental occurrence B) occurred when he was merely a boy C) came to him after a suggestion from his daughter Jenny D) came when he saw a spinning jenny in operation E) was realized when he was experimenting with spinning eight threads at once 3. We learn from the details in the passage that cotton spinning in England when Hargreaves was a boy A) was done on eight-threaded spinning machines B) was highly industrialized C) was carried out in people's houses D) was relatively uncommon in Lancashire E) was only experimental My daughter hates having her hair brushed because her hair often becomes and it is sometimes difficult to brush the knots out of it without pulling her hair. 2. the dustbin sending trash flying everywhere. 3. Neil's and lan's views on the United Nations differ Neil thinks it is an ineffective, powerless organization, while Ian believes it is the only realistic way to achieve world peace. 4. Most of the time the troops are to their barracks, but they are given occasional day and weekend passes to go into town. 5. The lead role in the film The Pianist elevated the actor from to celebrity status. ELS 341 With the devil's aid, Faust could supposedly perform remarkable feats. There seems little doubt that a fortune-teller of this name actually existed. He is said to have died in about 1540, but the details of his life have been lost. He was reputed to be a charlatan who travelled from place to place in Germany, passing himself off as a physician, alchemist, astrologer and magician. Faust owes his first literary fame to the anonymous author of Das Faustbuch , published in Frankfurt in 1587. This was a collection of tales concerning a number of ancient and medieval wizards who had gone by the name of Faust. Das Faustbuch relates how Faust sought to acquire supernatural knowledge and power through a bargain with Satan. In this pact, signed in his own blood, Faust agreed that Mephistopheles, a devil, was to become his servant for 24 years. In return, Faust would surrender himself to Satan at the end of that period. Mephistopheles entertained his master with luxurious living, long intellectual conversations, and glimpses of the spirit world. After the agreed 24 years, during an earthquake, Faust was carried off to Hell. The Faust legend soon gained wide popularity and was used as a theme by many writers. The most outstanding treatment of the legend was formulated by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, who raised the story to the level of a powerful drama and introduced the motif of a heroine, Margarete. Other authors in the 19th and 20th centuries have used the legend as the basis for stories, but the best recent work is probably the 1947 novel Doktor Faustus , by the German writer Thomas Mann. This version makes use of certain passages from the original Faustbuch . Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 342 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. From the information given in the passage, we learn that Johann Wolfgang von Goethe ... . A) used passages from the original Faustbuch B) introduced a main female character into the Faust legend C) entitled his book Faustbuch D) became very popular after he wrote about the Faust legend E) was rumoured to have an agreement with Satan 2. The author states that Thomas Wlann A) wrote the best modern version of the Faust legend B) is the last author to write about the Faust legend C) completely changed the main theme of the legend D) added only a few passages of his own to the original work E) wrote about a person called Dr. Johannes Faust, who lived in recent times 3. Although the Faust stories are many and varied, the passage makes it clear that A) the basis for all of them is a legend which is entirely fiction B) there is no doubt that the original book was written by Doctor Johannes Faust himself C) there was almost certainly a real man by that name in the 16th century, who performed magic tricks D) the original Dr. Johannes Faust was actually a man of good reputation and a qualified doctor E) the actual details of the life of this physician, alchemist and magician have come down to the present I only had a/an of Kate at the party, so I didn't really notice what she was wearing. 2. In Christianity and Islam is generally thought of as a place where 3. He claims he can contact people's dead relatives for them and he charges a fee for his immoral people burn in eternal fires after death. services. Lots of people pay him money, but I think he is a complete who preys on vulnerable members of society grieving for their loved ones. 4. The lady who is head of the department in which I will be working is '. to be a strict manager to work for. All the members of her staff that I have spoken to so far have confirmed that she expects quite a lot from her employees. 5. In the last few years, mobile phone shops have everywhere. There doesn't seem to be a street without one these days. ELS 343 Called hallucinogens because users often hallucinate, or experience non-existent sensations, these drugs are also known as mind-bending drugs. Others are made in laboratories. Twenty micrograms, an almost infinitesimal amount, is sufficient to produce a hallucinogenic effect. The most pronounced psychological effects induced by hallucinogens are a heightened awareness of colours and patterns together with a slowed perception of time and a distorted body image. Sensations may seem to cross over , giving the user a sense of hearing colours and seeing sounds. Users may also slip into a dreamlike state, indifferent to the world around them and forgetful of time and place to such an extent that they may believe it possible to step out of a window or stand in front of a speeding car without harm. Users may feel several different emotions at once or swing wildly from one emotion to another. It is impossible to predict what kind of experience a hallucinogen may produce. Sometimes, taking a hallucinogen leaves the user with serious mental or emotional problems, though it is unclear whether the drug simply unmasks a previously undetected disorder or actually produces it. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 344 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. One possible physical danger of taking the type of drugs described in the passage is that the user may A) become deaf B) think that he or she can smell colours C) feel absolutely no sense of danger D) have mild nightmares E) lose his or her eyesight 2. The effect which is not listed among those resulting from taking hallucinogens is A) an unreal concept of the shape of the body B) a more intense consciousness of colours C) a distorted concept of time D) a slowing down of the central nervous system E) the experiencing of sensations which are not actually existent 3. The passage tells us that it is not clear if A) it is possible to accurately predict what kind of experience a hallucinogen may produce B) C) different colours actually do have different smells D) lysergic acid diethylamide is a hallucinogen or not E) hallucinogens cause serious mental problems or simply reveal them Although primary education has improved in Mexico, secondary schools are still in some rural areas. This lack of schools means that children from these areas have no hope of entering university. 2. I enjoyed the hall of mirrors best at the fun fair. Each mirror my figure. In one I looked about seven feet tall and in another I looked really fat. 3. The collapse of the economy in Indonesia led to tensions between ethnic and religious groups, and this increased intolerance led to civil unrest. 4. They lived in luxury in a big house on the hill and seemed completely to the poverty around them. Although they had more than enough, they never gave the villagers anything. 5. The wartime bomb lay in the woods for over half a century. ELS 345 Its founder and greatest teacher was Confucius, whose humane philosophy also influenced the civilizations of all of eastern Asia, by way of many legends spread to illustrate Confucius' beliefs. According to one story, he and his disciples passed a cemetery where a woman was weeping beside a grave. My husband's father was killed here by a tiger, and my husband also, and now my son has met the same fate. That's why I'm crying, she explained to them. When they asked her why she did not leave such an unlucky place, she answered that, in this place, there was no oppressive government. Remember this, my children, said Confucius, oppressive government is fiercer and more feared than a tiger. In such teaching and with such wise sayings, Confucius tried to bring people to a virtuous way of life and a respect for the teachings of the wise men of older generations. He always said of himself that he was a transmitter, not a maker . He collected and edited the poetry, the music and the historical writings of what he considered the golden age. Confucius laid no claim to being more than a man. Yet when he died, he was revered almost as a god. Temples were erected in his honour in every city of China. His grave at Kufow, in what is now Shandong Province, became a place of pilgrimage. Though Confucianism is commonly called a religion, it is rather a system of moral conduct. Confucius did not talk of God but of goodness. He did not teach about any god, saying simply, Respect the gods, but have as little to do with them as possible. His attention was centred on making people better in their lifetime. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as c) an area of land used for burials d) cry e) a place where a dead person is buried f) something that unavoidably happens to someone end death g) unjust and hard to bear h) violent aggressive angry i) morally good of good character j) ideas and principles of a person or a religion intended to be learnt by others k) revise an author's work and prepare by selection or arrangement and by adding notes I) have a deep respect for a person m) build construct n) behaviour o) be concentrated on (something) (phrase) 346 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. One way described in the passage that Confucianism spread throughout eastern Asia was by A) oppressive governments B) wise men of China C) lecturing at universities D) preaching about God E) the legends told about its founder 2. From the description of Confucianism in the passage, it is fair to say that A) the worshipping of many gods is a central feature B) Confucius encouraged people to look forward to eternal life in paradise C) Confucius saw little virtue in poetry or music D) it is more a philosophy than a true religion E) its influence has been limited to the eastern section of China 3. The story related in the passage was used by Confucius to make a point about A) the danger of living close to wild animals B) how people are afraid of being unjustly governed C) how important it is to grieve after the death of a loved one D) how some people just seem to get all the bad luck E) how people should always respect their elders Gandhi wanted to ensure that the lowest levels in Indian society were treated in a/an way. Previously known as untouchables , Gandhi called them Harijan , which means children of God - a name by which they are still known today. 2. He had his second wife beheaded and his fifth wife, Anne of Cleves, met the same 3. His eye was 4. The the target as he pulled the trigger of his rifle. of the Hindu prince Siddhartha Gautama, which describe the path to enlightenment, evolved into Buddhism. 5. I'm afraid that if Billy's during the lessons does not improve, we will have to consider expelling him from the school. ELS 347 Later, minor offenders and debtors were imprisoned - major offenders, on the other hand, were executed. Prisons were mainly places to put people away and forget about them. Thus, they were neglected and poorly-run institutions subject to terrible overcrowding, filth and disease. Charles Dickens presented a vivid picture of life in London's famous Marshalsea debtors' prison in his novel Little Dorrit, published in 1857. Even more famous were London's Newgate and Fleet prisons, known for their overcrowding, filth and violence. In Great Britain the movement to reform prisons was begun in 1773 by John Howard, the appointed sheriff of Bedfordshire. His reports on prison conditions, especially The State of the Prisons, spurred a sweeping reform movement that was also influential in the United States. His reports coincided with an extreme overcrowding of British prisons, in part because transportation of criminals to overseas colonies such as Australia had diminished. So overcrowded were some prisons that many criminals were housed on decaying ships in the Thames River. The Prisons Act of 1791 was the first step toward creating a national prison system and alleviating the worst conditions. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as be killed as punishment for a crime g) not be looked after properly h) of a low standard i) affected by something, or likely to be affected (phrase) j) a large and disgusting amount of dirt k) very clear and detailed I) encourage something to happen faster or sooner m) very significant with great consequences n) having a significant effect on the way someone acts o) happen at the same time p) reduce in size, importance or intensity q) rotting falling apart r) make less severe 348 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, prisoners in the earliest English prisons most likely A) had been involved in a violent crime B) would be executed eventually C) would be transported to overseas colonies D) owed people money E) had not committed a very serious offence 2. From the information given in the passage, we can infer that before the 18th century, Britain A) used to send a lot of its criminals to overseas colonies B) was faced with a high unemployment rate C) would execute all those who had committed a crime D) was more tolerant to its criminals than in the following centuries E) had almost no prisons 3. The author points out that one thing instrumental in bringing about changes in the British prison system was A) the abolition of capital punishment in 1791 B) a rise in violent crime C) the fiction works of Charles Dickens, describing the dirt and overcrowding D) the written work of John Howard on the standards of prisons E) a fall in the number of homeless people The walked in and sat in the town's library in order to keep warm. The staff felt sorry for him, but he was very dirty and kept muttering to himself, which was plainly disturbing other people, so they asked him to leave. 2. It really annoys me when I see young people begging for money. I think they are just people who try to get by without bothering to work. 3. After the neighbours complained of a smell from one of the flats, environmental health officers visited and, after breaking down the door, they found an old woman living among that covered the whole place. 4. 5. in them. Research has shown that the wives of soldiers are depression when their husbands are away on duty for long periods. ELS 349 According to the legend, the people were ordered to bow to it as though it were the duke of Austria. A skilled crossbowman named William Tell refused to do this. Soldiers took him and his son Walter before Gessler. The cruel Gessler ordered Tell to shoot an apple off Walter's head at 100 paces. Tell took an arrow from his quiver and slipped it under his belt. He took another and fired it from his bow. The arrow pierced the apple. Gessler asked Tell what the first arrow had been intended for. To slay you, tyrant, had I killed my son. Tell fled during a storm and soon after killed Gessler. Swiss legends place these events in the year 1307. In the country's actual history, in 1315, the men of the three forest-cantons - Uri, Schwyz and Unterwalden defeated an invading Austrian army. They then renewed and enlarged the Everlasting League, which helped lay the foundation of Swiss independence. William Tell first appeared in Swiss literature in the second half of the 15th century. In 1804 the German poet Friedrich Schiller made the legend the subject of a drama, and the Italian composer Gioacchino Rossini used it in an opera in 1829. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as a) generally believed, but with a degree of doubt or based on uncertain knowledge b) cruel unjust toward people under one's control c) a long, thin piece of wood or metal, used especially for supporting things d) briefly bend your body towards someone as a formal way of greeting someone or showing respect e) the distance you move when you take one step f) case for carrying arrows g) put something somewhere quickly and quietly h) make a hole in something with a sharp object i) kill someone, especially intentionally and violently j) displaying uncontrollable anger (phrase) k) run away from somewhere I) never ending unchanging m) allow for something's creation provide conditions for the establishment of an organization (phrase) 350 ELS , Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, Gessler made all the citizens of Altdorf A) shoot arrows at apples placed on people's heads B) fight against the invading Austrian forces C) join the Everlasting League D) show respect to their Austrian rulers E) exclude William Tell from their society 2. The author explains how William Tell got into trouble with the Austrian governor by A) disrespectfully placing his hat on the top of a pole B) treating the people who worked for him cruelly and unjustly C) recklessly shooting arrows at his own son D) refusing to fight for the Austrian army against Switzerland E) not bowing down to a symbol of Austrian rule 3. It is clear from the passage that the legend of William Tell A) has provided the storyline for different art forms B) is completely inaccurate and purely fabrication C) happened a lot earlier than claimed by the Swiss D) was first made up around the 18th century E) is a story the Austrians are particularly proud of İdi Amin, the , self-declared ruler of the African nation of Uganda between 1971 and 1978, expelled all Asians and ordered 300,000 tribal executions during his rule. 2. In popular cowboy films, disagreements are often settled by duelling, or shooting at one another, usually from a distance of twenty and at noon or, sometimes, dawn. 3. The legend of St. George is the story of how a young and brave man saved the Princess Sabra by 4. a huge monster known as a dragon. After using many millions of dollars of the people's money, including foreign aid money, the President of the Philippines, Ferdinand Marcos the country in 1986 and was never allowed to return. 5. After being told that his proposal was unsuccessful, Jeremy stormed out of the office saying he was quitting his job, but he was back at his desk bright and early the next day. ELS 351 Irish traditional music as it is known today is the result of a centuries-old tradition of melodically rich dance music and song. It was formerly played without harmonic accompaniment such as guitar, and was usually learned by ear rather than from written music. Irish dance music is distinctively lively, and Irish songs are often highly ornamented. This music is contrasted with the Irish pub ballad tradition - which has made, for example, the song Whiskey in the Jar famous - and the modern folk tradition, as well as what goes under the name Celtic music . The term Celtic music usually combines Irish traditional music with various other traditional musics, including those of Scotland and the Shetland Islands Cape Breton Island, Nova Scotia, Canada Wales the Isle of Man Northumberland in northern England Brittany in northwestern France and sometimes Galicia in northwestern Spain. The term, though widely used, is eschewed by many traditionalists. While once mostly homemade by non-professionals for their own entertainment and that of their neighbours and friends, now Irish music can be heard at informal gatherings of musicians, often in pubs, and occasionally in concert halls, not only in Ireland and countries with large Irish immigrant populations, but indeed in many countries around the globe. The Irish song tradition is diverse and rich. It enjoys a prominent place among the interrelated song traditions of Scotland, England and North America. Irish songs, with plaintive or sprightly melodies to suit their themes, cover many subjects love and betrayal, everyday country life and occupations, and historical or newsworthy events. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 352 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, Irish traditional music A) has been continued in other countries by people of Irish descent B) consists mainly of simple pub songs such as Whiskey in the Jar C) was originally read from written music D) used to be backed merely by guitar chords E) is hardly heard outside of Ireland, the United States and Australia 2. It is clear from the passage that traditional Irish songs A) are always slow and sad B) are normally love songs C) describe many human experiences D) are usually sung by people drinking beer with friends E) have no connection at all with Celtic music 3. We understand from the passage that, in the past, a musician of the Irish tradition would have A) been trained first in classical music B) travelled around the world playing to different audiences C) kept to simple, uncomplicated tunes D) also played Scottish, English and American music E) learned the tunes just by listening to them 1. Although perhaps the most outstanding electric guitarist in history, Jimi Hendrix couldn't 2. The movie Fatal Attraction is the frightening and disturbing tale of how a man's actually read music, and so he had to learn all of his tunes of his wife with an attractive business colleague completely ruins his life. 3. Edward sang a solo with piano 4. Almost everything that David Beckham and his wife do or say is at the school concert. , and even their shopping trips gain front page attention in some newspapers. 5. American musical legend Bob Dylan began his career by singing folk which protested the many injustices of American society, but in 1964 he switched to rock and began singing long, complex, poetic songs, often about revenge of one sort or another. ELS 353 A pioneer in the field of jazz rock, the group topped the charts in the late 1960s with their fresh sound. The idea for the group was conceived by Al Kooper, a keyboard player and vocalist who had previously been a member of the Royal Teens and the Blues Project, as well as playing organ for Bob Dylan. He wanted to form a band that would expand the scope of rock to include elements of jazz, blues, classical and folk music. The core of the original group included Kooper, Blues Project guitarist Steve Katz, drummer Bobby Colomby and bassist Jim Fielder. Blood, Sweat and Tears added numerous horn players from New York jazz and studio bands before releasing the moderately successful debut album Child is Father to the Man, in 1968. It included various Kooper compositions as well as songs by Randy Newman, Carole King and others. Several members, including Kooper, left to pursue other interests after the first album. The band regrouped with David Clayton-Thomas, formerly of the Canadian blues band The Bossmen, as the lead vocalist. The 1969 Grammy-winning album Blood, Sweat and Tears spent more than two years on the United States charts, including seven successive weeks at number one. The group also achieved worldwide recognition, and the US State Department asked the band to do a good will tour abroad. In the early 1970s, the band had hits with Hi-De-Ho , Lucretia MacEvil and Go Down Gamblin' . A series of singers replaced Clayton-Thomas when he left to pursue a solo career, but he rejoined the group in 1974. With the emergence of other rock bands with a similar emphasis on brass, the group had trouble duplicating its recording success but became popular on the nightclub circuit. Through the years, more than forty musicians filled the positions of the eight-to-ten-member band. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 354 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. It is clear from the passage that, having made one album, A) several band members topped the charts with solo records B) some band members decided to no longer play for Blood, Sweat and Tears C) a few band members joined the Royal Teens and the Blues Project D) Al Kooper went on to play with Carole King E) the group didn't make any more records 2. According to the passage, during the band's existence, Blood, Sweat and Tears A) made little or no changes in the instruments they used B) failed to win any major awards C) only played their own songs D) argued fiercely over which instruments to include E) included different musicians 3. The author makes it clear that the band's fame faded when A) other, similar groups appeared B) several members were replaced by others C) Al Kooper left the group D) they stopped putting emphasis on brass E) they began to sing at nightclubs 1. The Dyson company were in the market for bagless vacuum cleaners, but now there are several models on the market. 2. The boy band was not prepared for the instant fame that accompanied the of their first album. 3. Liz needs good marks in science because she hopes to a career in medicine. 4. With the of professional women's football teams sponsored by top teams, such as Arsenal, fierce debate over the suitability of football for women has arisen. 5. In Lowry's paintings the is on the industrial landscape in which men, women and animals seem insignificant. ELS 355 After Jurassic Park opened, some mental health professionals posted warnings about the intensity of its excitements, especially for younger children. It's not just that the dinosaurs emit deafening roars and demolish things - like the monsters of a more innocent cinematic age - these beasts look virtually real. And what is more, they eat people to them, kids are just appetizers. This movie is dedicated to making you feel like food, says one psychiatrist. Children handle scary movies differently at different ages. Regardless of age, however, reactions may depend on how secure a child feels. I don't think that, by themselves, most of these movies can cause a terrible trauma, says another professor of child psychiatry. Likewise, some parents think that some psychiatrists are too cautious. If most grownups enjoy a good scare, the argument goes, why deny it to kids. What's the big deal if they have a nightmare or two - does it warp their lives. All of these points make one nostalgic for creature features like King Kong . As Kong-era kids knew without parental guidance, the big monster never meant any harm to anyone - not even child psychologists. He was simply in love. But they don't make monsters like that anymore. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as give out produce c) loud, deep sound (usu. from a large carniverous animal) d) wild animal, usually large and dangerous e) very nearly almost entirely f) small amount of food eaten before a meal in order to make you want more g) without paying any attention to (phrase) h) bad dream i) corrupt distort change shape j) help and advice from parents (phrase) 356 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. We can infer from the statement of one professor of child psychiatry that A) scary movies might cause trauma when combined with other factors B) older children are less affected by scary movies than younger ones C) children are afraid of being eaten by monsters D) a few movies may cause terrible trauma E) some parents are not cautious enough about what their children watch 2. It is stated in the passage that in Jurassic Park A) the excitement is definitely too intense for younger children to cope with B) the roars from the dinosaurs are too loud for children to listen to C) the beasts, despite demolishing things, are innocent D) children are eaten as starters to a meal E) the monsters, compared with those in earlier movies, are more life-like 3. Some parents, according to the passage, argue that A) psychiatrists never know what they are talking about B) all adults like being frightened C) King Kong shouldn't be watched without their supervision D) children can be allowed to watch scary movies E) nightmares can change a child's personality 1. The lion let out a when he saw another one entering his territory. 2. If they had received more as children, they might not be having the problems they are experiencing now. 3. A personal safety alarm is a device which a very loud whistle when pressed. 4. She decided to go ahead and buy the dress what her mother might say. 5. ELS 357 Sereno's luck was due in part to his willingness to go wherever the bones might be, however difficult and remote the site. His discoveries helped him piece together the family tree of dinosaurs. Sereno's discoveries began during graduate school. In 1984, as the first American graduate student of paleontology to study in China, he identified two new dinosaur species among the bones in Chinese fossil archives. When Chinese authorities rejected his application to dig in the Gobi desert of Mongolia, he took his request to a local official in Mongolia. Sereno explained in French that he wanted to hunt for the bones of big animals. The confused official admitted him under the provisions for big game hunters but offered little hope of finding much game in the desert. Sereno used his findings in China and Mongolia to make a family tree of the omithischian, or bird-hipped, dinosaurs, one of the two main orders of dinosaurs. He based his work on careful comparison of details of various skeletons. The discovery that made Sereno famous came in 1988, the year after he completed his doctorate and joined the faculty at the University of Chicago. Three years later and less than a mile away, Sereno found the complete skeleton of a 228-million-year-old dinosaur, which he named Eoraptor. Only six feet long, with sharp teeth and long claws, this earliest known dinosaur looked like a miniature version of Tyrannosaurus Rex. It confirmed that dinosaurs began as small, meat-eating animals that walked and ran on their hind legs. Sereno was the first person to conduct extensive searches for dinosaur fossils in Africa. Governmental red tape and conditions in the Sahara desert made his expeditions to Niger in 1993 and Morocco in 1995 two of his most gruelling but also most rewarding. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 358 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the author, Sereno's luck was actually a result of his A) ability to speak fluent French B) bribing a Chinese government official C) position on the staff at the university D) working in isolated and inhospitable places E) knowledge of hunting large wild animals 2. We understand from the passage that the Mongolian official A) thought that Sereno would hunt large animals in the desert B) helped Sereno to get to the desert and dig for bones C) knew everything important about the Gobi desert D) actually knew that Sereno was a famous paleontologist E) was impressed by Sereno's scientific discoveries 3. According to the information in the passage, the earliest known dinosaur Sereno found A) was a huge type of bird B) was similar to a Tyrannosaurus Rex but much smaller C) was hunted by early big game hunters D) lived exactly 225 million years ago E) lived in the area where Niger and Morocco are located today James has built his daughter a doll's house. It even has a/an ironing board and iron. 2. The police inspectors are trying to the clues from the murder, hoping that they will lead to the killer. 3. A traditional emphasis on hard work and the to undertake the most 4. Fatima is from Afghanistan and was admitted into Germany under the 5. At the age of seven, he applied to an art school for children, but he was for political refugees. because he was too young. ELS 359 Its capital was Knossos, a city dominated by the palace of Minos the king. All over the eastern half of Crete there were cities, each with its own palace, and the population of the island must have been at least a quarter of a million. Minoan power and influence, however, were not confined to Crete alone, for the Minoans, by means of their ships, ruled the surrounding seas, set up colonies on the Aegean islands to the north, and established trade links with other peoples on the mainlands of Anatolia and Greece as well as with the Pharaohs of Egypt. Minoan objects and cultural influence have been found as far away as the ruins of Mycenae in Greece. But suddenly, sometime between 1500 and 1400 BC, the Minoan civilization came to an end, and was forgotten by the world for over 3,000 years. In the early years of this century, however, archaeologists discovered the remains of the Minoan civilization and evidence of its abrupt end. They thought that the Minoans had been overthrown by the invasion of a powerful enemy, the Mycenaeans from mainland Greece, but they could not explain why the Minoans, with their large fleet, should be taken by surprise before they could protect their cities, around which there were no signs of defensive walls nor could they explain why the invaders left the capital, Knossos, intact, yet destroyed all the other cities. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as complete undamaged 360 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. It seems that the early archaeologists A) had been investigating the Minoan civilization for many years prior to their discovery B) first traced the Minoan civilization through objects found in Greece, Egypt and Anatolia C) were unable to prove their theory as to how the Minoan civilization disappeared D) did not find the other Minoan cities as interesting as Knossos E) had no idea that the ruins they found had once been part of the Minoan civilization 2. The odd point about the archaeologists' theory was that A) all archaeologists since have disagreed with it B) the Minoan cities had obviously been well-protected against invasion C) there was no information found to show that the Mycenaeans had invaded the Minoan civilization D) the Minoans and the Mycenaeans had previously had good trade links E) despite the destruction of all the other cities, the capital was untouched 3. It is stated in the passage that A) the Minoans had the strongest fleet of the time B) the Mycenaeans were constantly at war with the Minoans C) each Minoan city had its own independent ruler D) Minoan influence spread beyond Crete E) the western half of Crete was the main part of the Minoan kingdom 1. The of the ancient city of Troy were discovered by Heinrich Schliemann in 1870. 2. The flowers we planted last spring have really 3. Fortunately the epidemic in this good weather. the town and didn't spread into the surrounding area. 4. We had a holiday and thoroughly enjoyed every second. 5. There was panic among the people when they heard that the army had the government. ELS 361 For example, worldwide toxic waste sites are more prevalent in poorer communities. In the United States, the single most important factor in predicting the location of such sites is the ethnic composition of a neighborhood. Three of the five largest commercial hazardous waste landfills in America are in predominantly Black or Hispanic neighborhoods, and three out of every five Black or Hispanic Americans live in the vicinity of an uncontrolled toxic waste site. The wealth of a community is not nearly as good a predictor of hazardous waste locations as the ethnic background of the residents, suggesting that the selection of sites for hazardous waste disposal involves racism. Environmental racism takes international forms as well. American corporations often continue to produce dangerous, US-banned chemicals and ship them to developing countries. In addition, the developed world has shipped large amounts of toxic waste to developing countries for unsafe disposal. For instance, experts estimate that 50 to 80 percent of electronic waste produced in the United States, including computer parts, is shipped to waste sites in developing countries such as China and India. They pour acid on electronic parts to extract silver and gold, and they smash cathode-ray tubes from computer monitors to remove lead. These activities so pollute the groundwater beneath the site that drinking water must be brought to the area by trucks from a town 29 km away. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as of factories) (phrase) c) widely or commonly occurring d) dangerous to people's health or safety e) a place where large amounts of waste material are disposed of by burying them in a very large and deep hole f) in a more noticeable way than other things of the same kind g) in the nearby area (phrase) h) a person's social heritage, previous experience, and training the kind of family that a person comes from i) the act of getting rid of something j) not allowed to be used forbidden k) send goods somewhere by sea or by some other means of transport I) make a liquid or other substance flow steadily out of a container by holding the container at an angle m) separate a material from another substance n) break into many pieces by hitting, often by hitting repeatedly o) under 361 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The author of the passage seems to believe that the first consideration in the selection of a place for toxic waste disposal is A) the economic conditions of the residents B) the ethnic roots of the people living in the area C) the distance of the site from the sources of the waste D) the soil composition of the chosen area E) the availability of easy transport to the area 2. The author points out that chemicals not allowed in the US A) are no longer produced there B) are not really unsafe C) are safely handled by employees in other countries D) are quite easy to dispose of safely E) are exported to less developed countries 3. It is clear from the passage that at one waste site in China A) the majority of the workers are of Black or Hispanic origin B) a greater part of the waste is recycled C) the waste is buried deep in the soil D) the underground water has become too contaminated to drink E) the workers are extreemly greedy The workers at the motor parts factory, who to asbestos dust, are not provided with sufficient safety equipment. 2. The sale of stolen garden machinery and bicycles is so at second- hand markets that the police have suggested closing these markets down. 3. 4. Your hotel is ideally situated for you, as there are several art galleries Charles makes small garden ornaments by clay into plastic moulds, and then he sells them by the side of the road. 5. In 480 BC, the Persians burned or everything on the Acropolis in Athens and killed its defenders, but within 13 years, the ruins had been cleared away and the walls had been rebuilt. ELS 363 There was childhood with the light of its eyes quenched, its beauty gone, and its helplessness alone remaining. It is no wonder then that Johann Heinrich Pestaiozzi's (1746-1827) school at Yverdon, Switzerland, created international attention and attracted thousands of European and American visitors from educational circles. What they saw was a school for children - for real children, not miniature adults. They saw physically active children running, jumping and playing. They saw small children learning the names of numbers by counting real objects and preparing to learn reading by playing with letter blocks. They saw older children engaged in object lessons progressing in their study of geography from observing the area around the school, measuring it, making their own relief maps of it, and finally seeing a professionally executed map of it. This was the school and these were the methods developed by Pestalozzi in accordance with his belief that the goal of education should be the natural development of the individual child, and that educators should focus on the development of the child rather than on memorization of subject matter that he was unable to understand. Pestaiozzi's school also mirrored the idea that learning begins with firsthand observation of an object and moves gradually toward the remote and abstract realm of words and ideas. The teacher's job was to guide, not distort, the natural growth of the child by selecting his experiences and then directing those experiences toward the realm of ideas. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as lacking brightness of colour whitish thoroughly tired exhausted thin and lacking flesh with emotion or brightness taken away be occupied with be busy with take the dimensions, quantity or capacity, etc., of something a diagram showing the height and unevenness of the land surface of an area (two words) be carried out, completed or performed showing agreement with (phrase) reflect show a true picture of direct directly from the original source far distant in space or in time existing only in the mind not concrete field of interest, study spoil by altering the natural development of something 364 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. From the details in the passage, Pestalozzi's teaching method could be described as A) a teacher-centred approach B) concentrating on memorization of facts C) typical of those described by Charles Dickens D) a child-centred approach E) typical of those in earlier European and American schools 2. According to the passage, Pestalozzi believed A) sporting achievement was more important than academic success B) Charles Dickens's description of school children to be wholly inaccurate C) children could not perform complex calculations D) learning should advance from the practical to the theoretical E) that school automatically destroyed the joy of childhood 3. We learn from the passage that Pestalozzi's methods A) left children exhausted and looking pale B) hindered the normal development of children C) were expensive to implement D) were quickly adopted by American schools E) aroused the interest of educationalists internationally 1. When walking in mountainous areas, you must carry a/an so that you are aware of the steepness of your chosen path. 2. Student doctors spend one year training at a teaching hospital in order to gain experience of how patients are treated. 3. All children at schools in the area are given Road Safety training government guidelines. 4. As the sky darkened, the whole family harvesting the ripe cotton, hoping to complete their task before the storm broke out. 5. After a morning's intense training, the army recruits looked thoroughly In 1718 the Queen Anne's Revenge, which had been the flagship of the infamous pirate Edward Teach's fleet, was sunk off the Atlantic coast of the American colonies. Teach, known popularly as Blackbeard, escaped from the sinking vessel along with his crew. Legend has it that they were able to save the vast treasures they had accumulated during two years of plundering ships and towns along the Eastern seaboard. Although the whereabouts of the rumoured treasure remain unknown, marine archaeologists working off the coast of North Carolina discovered what they believed to be the sunken remains of the Queen Anne's Revenge. The hull of the ship apparently settled near where it was reported to have sunk, in water little more than 6 metres deep and less than 2 miles from the coast. The location of the ship had remained undetermined for more than 270 years mostly because of the clutter of other ships at the bottom of the ocean in that area. Since the time of the ship's sinking, literally hundreds of ships had come to rest in the vicinity of the suspected resting place of the Queen Anne's Revenge. The team of marine archaeologists, however, consulted a rare book from 1719 that chronicled the story of the sinking of Blackbeard's notorious ship, which ran aground in 1718 while attempting to enter the Beaufort inlet near North Carolina. The book provided an exact description of the location where the ship went down, and the marine archaeologists were able to locate the ship using that information and a sophisticated device designed to detect large amounts of metal. This device made it possible for the archaeologists to detect the ship's numerous cannons. In November 1996, after a decade-long process of research and underwater searching, the team finally located the hull of a ship that seemed consistent with known information concerning the design of the Queen Anne's Revenge. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 366 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The remains of the ship described in the passage were found A) in 1719, after the publication of a diary of the events of 1718 B) by the famous marine biologist Edward Teach C) on the shore of the Beaufort inlet in North Carolina D) by marine scientists purely by chance E) in relatively shallow waters close to the American mainland 2. From the facts given in the passage, we know that Blackbeard A) was a member of Queen Anne's army B) died with his crew when the Queen Anne's Revenge sank off the American coast C) escaped from the Queen Anne's Revenge, but had to leave all his riches on board D) had stolen large amounts of valuable items from towns on the American coast E) was the leader of a team of marine archaeologists 3. According to the passage, a special metal detector was used to A) raise the Queen Anne's Revenge from the water B) locate the treasure left by Blackbeard C) remove the wreckage of other sunken vessels D) decipher a rare and ancient book E) find the location of the ship's large guns 1. In the North Atlantic Ocean, delicious northern lobsters are caught off the eastern of Canada. 2. He has no formal qualifications, but, having worked his way up from the cutting room to international transactions, he has a great knowledge of the diamond business. 3. Your hotel is in the of the United Nations building, so you should definitely visit there. 4. Michael and his friends spend their summers scuba diving in the Mediterranean, looking for Portuguese ships which might hold treasure. 5. Thomas Mann kept a daily diary which events in Nazi Germany while he and his family lived in exile in France and Switzerland. ELS 367 The recipients - and there have been a total of 94 of them since the prize was launched in 1989 - hail from every region of the globe. Among the profiles of the 2003 award winners is Odigha Odigha, a Nigerian forest activist and educator. He recalls what it was like as a child to walk to school under the canopy of the rainforest in Cross River State in southeastern Nigeria. You could walk several kilometres without seeing the sun's rays, he says. You would only hear the sounds of animals and birds, and see wonderful butterflies, and come in close contact with nature, run around and pluck some leaves and fruits. As an adventurous kid, I used to enjoy it so much. And, at that time, you could get into fresh water, which was so fresh that you could drink it. The rainforest was a paradise in the eyes of the young boy. It had vast stands of hardwoods and was home to the world's endangered gorillas. But 40 years later, the rainforest in Cross River State has become a much different place. What we have now is a vast desert encroachment coming in from the north, coming towards the coastal area, Mr Odigha says. The trees have gone, trees like mahogany and ebony. It is a pathetic situation. I am not sure that we have fully come to terms with what we are losing, what is happening to us as a country. A century of excessive and largely unchecked logging has had devastating consequences, says Mr. Odigha, and today less than ten percent of Nigeria's original rainforest survives. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 368 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the description in the passage, Oaigha Odigha A) likes mahogany and ebony better than other hardwoods B) has rescued gorillas from becoming extinct C) was brought up in an idyllic area D) believes everyone has fully understood the fate of rainforests E) used to destroy the forest by logging 2. We understand from the passage that the course Odigha Odigha followed to go to school as a child A) is now closed to children B) used to be very safe C) has now become a desert area D) was a long way to go for a child of his age E) was private property, so he was trespassing 3. It is obvious from his statements that Odigha Odigha A) does not believe that he deserves to be awarded for what he did B) believes that what was done to the forests can be fully reversed C) has created a model paradise in his hometown similar to the landscape of his childhood D) is not very hopeful about the fate of his country's forests E) has managed to stop the logging activities in his area Now that Mark is the president of the union, he's lost touch with what's going on in union activity. 2. Perhaps the best work of Japanese writer Yasunari Kawabata, the of the 1968 Nobel prize for literature, are his palm-of-the-hand stories , very very short