sure of the exact number of forgeries hanging in the world's museums E) it is not possible to prove a painting's authenticity 3. We understand from the passage that the people who manage art galleries and museums A) are happy to assist the experts in examining all their paintings B) make additional money by copying the works of art they look after C) often hide counterfeiters who are hiding from the police D) usually buy fake works of art when the originals are unavailable E) seem to accept that, among their exhibits, there may be counterfeits 1. The government has made it clear that it is a serious and treasonable offence to 2. When Colonel Tucker resigned from the army, he became the terrorists. at his regiment's armoury museum. 3. He is not personally interested in Islamic Art, but he bought the two 16th-century Iznik tiles as a/an 4. He is hoping their value will increase. The tiles came with a certificate stating that experts had examined them, so there was no doubt of their 5. The farmers are very angry because cheap New Zealand lamb has been the market lately. The large quantities of this imported meat has driven the price of Welsh lamb down. ELS 153 When nature first developed this intricate and adaptable organism, human eyes were used primarily for outdoor work and living. With the stress of indoor life and artificial lighting, abnormal strain is placed on eyes today. Sometimes more than nature's assistance is needed to keep eyes in shape for the many uses they serve in modern life. It is also true that we have extended man's normal lifespan to almost twice what it was in primitive societies. Visual deficiencies also increase with age, and eyes usually need some corrective care as one grows older. Undetected, uncorrected eye trouble can affect the entire personality structure and can make the difference between success and failure in one's working life or personal relations. Theodore Roosevelt, for instance, was slow and backward till it was discovered that his vision was bad. After his defective sight was corrected, he emerged as one of the leaders of his time. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as not natural made by man g) stress pressure difficulty h) healthy in good condition (phrase) i) make longer j) period of time for which something is normally expected to live or function properly k) concerned with sight I) weakness shortage m) not noticed n) making less progress than normal o) imperfect faulty p) come into view become known 154 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the writer there is a close relationship between A) the development of the eye and how much rest a person gets B) the health of a person's eyes and his success C) a person's age and how easy it is to detect eye trouble D) the shape of the eye and its ability to cope with modern life E) the use of artificial lighting and the age at which eye problems start 2. The writer states that people in modern societies A) rarely do any outdoor activities B) have much healthier eyes than in the past C) believe that having perfect vision is a sign of success D) do not have eyes of the same shape eyes as people in primitive societies E) live approximately twice as long as did those in primitive ones 3. Modern living conditions A) have developed because man prefers artificial lighting B) have caused the eye to change shape C) require the eye to be used less frequently D) put the eye under a lot of pressure E) have lessened the incidence of defective eyesight 1. I'm going to see my bank manager today to see if he will the repayment period of my loan. 2. My friend never laughs or finds anything funny. I think he has a sense of humour 3. Discipline at the school is the responsibility of the individual teachers. During the investigation, it that all of the directors had been aware of 4. the embezzlement from the start. 5. The of her divorce has left her in a deep depression. ELS 155 The rapid growth of industry made Britain the world's leading industrial nation - the workshop of the world , as it was called - and the British Empire reached the height of its power when Queen Victoria was proclaimed Empress of India in 1876. During her long life, which lasted 82 years, the Queen herself became a symbol of Britain's greatness. In 1840, Victoria married Prince Albert and lived happily with him until he died in 1861. After his death she led a lonely life, withdrew from public affairs, and could only rarely be persuaded to visit London. When she died in 1901 after a reign of 63 years, the world stood on the threshold of the 20th century, and many British people felt that a great age had gone for ever. a) period of rule b) without breaks continuous c) very fast d) place where things are made or repaired e) declare announce publicly or officially f) move back from decide to take no further part in g) service of, or matters concerning, the people task of government (phrase) h) entrance beginning 156 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. In 1861 A) the British Empire conquered India B) Queen Victoria gave up the throne of Great Britain C) Prince Albert became Queen Victoria's husband D) industry began to grow rapidly E) Queen Victoria lost her husband 2. During the reign of Queen Victoria, A) the British Empire was formed B) other countries lived in fear of Britain's power C) Britain was involved in hardly any wars D) public affairs were the sole responsibility of the monarch E) the only country to have industrialized was Britain 3. Queen Victo, as death A) came about because she was so lonely without her husband B) brought about the collapse of the British Empire C) left Britain ill-equipped to enter the 20th century D) was considered by many to be the end of an era E) caused the era of peace to come to an end 1. Because of allegations made in the press, the candidate was forced to from the election. 2. They made such progress that they completed the course in half the normal time. 3. I would love to have a few hours of relaxation, but it's impossible with the demands the children put on me. 4. We'll take your machine into the and see if we can find out what's wrong with it. 5. In celebration of the royal wedding, the day was a public holiday. ELS 157 Studies conducted in England and the United States show that many people resort to self-treatment, and that this is due to a barrier between the doctor and themselves, which makes them too diffident to consult the doctor. At the other end of the scale is the person who believes that the doctor is infallible and who expects miraculous treatment. Thus, the need for health education emerges at this point, not with the aim of making every man his own doctor, but rather with the aim of helping people to judge for themselves when they need professional help. For example, a simple cut on a finger will usually respond to first-aid and a simple dressing to protect it and keep it clean, which can easily be done at home. in cultivated land that might contain tetanus spores - then the patient should consult his doctor. In any case, he should be able to recognize the signs of inflammation, in which case he should consult his doctor. Dalzell-Ward) Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as d) obstacle e) lacking confidence f) go to a person for advice g) just the opposite (phrase) h) faultless i) close to impossibility J) so k) appear come out I) react favourably m) situation n) hot and painful swelling of an injury Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The doctor-patient relationship A) is only effective if the patient trusts his doctor B) can be stronger when a network of health services is formed in the country C) is weaker especially in rural areas, where people are apt to be more hesitant D) can be regularized by teaching people not to consult a professional about their injuries unless absolutely necessary E) is a most significant point in enabling health services to work efficiently 2. While some patients are rather hesitant about seeking medical treatment A) some people have a good knowledge of the medical services in the country B) some patients are rather unaware of what to expect as a citizen from the medical authorities C) others are complaining about the lack of medical services D) many of them don't even know how to apply first-aid E) others believe doctors are never mistaken and can cure any illness 3. It is emphasized in the passage that every person A) should know something about medical treatment in case it is needed urgently B) needs a certain amount of health education so as to know, at least, when to consult a doctor C) should have confidence in doctors, who try their best to help the sick D) has the right to benefit from health services equally E) should be aware of the circumstances in which doctors are performing their duties After only a short time, caterpillars from their cocoons as adult butterflies. 2. If had been different, we might have been able to take a summer holiday this year. 3. She had to to washing her clothes by hand as the washing machine was not working. 4. The pilot made a landing considering that both engines had failed. 5. The police are investigating the way in which the company has its business over the last year. His ideas, the fruit of many years of patient thought and study, were attacked by learned and ignorant alike. He was called a madman, a deceiver, and an anti-Christian. Long and bitter quarrels arose, and most religious people of that time attacked him. They accused him of trying to destroy religion and morals completely, though Darwin, of course, had no such intention. His book dealt in a scientific way with a problem of science, and the only critics he answered were those who attacked him on scientific grounds. His refusal to return abuse did not stop his enemies, however. The newspapers were filled with letters and articles pouring scorn on the very idea of evolution and the less the writers knew about the subject, the more violent their attack was. Darwin, however, was well-supported by a few able scientists, who untiringly spread what he taught. He gathered so many facts, and built so surely on these unanswerable facts, that his ideas carried great weight once they were understood. After the first stormy outbursts had died away, men began to see things Darwin's way. Slowly and quietly, Darwin's teachings conquered the world. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as in the same way similarly both g) extremely unpleasant h) for scientific reasons (phrase) i) declining to reply back with insults (phrase) j) cover with contempt (phrase) k) fierce aggressive i) feverish attacks (phrase) m) win overcome 162 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Darwin's theory of evolution A) failed to be understood clearly because it wasn't well supported with facts B) was eventually admitted, although it had been severely attacked at first C) was difficult to defend because of its unanswerable points D) was regarded as a great success on scientific grounds E) became popular only after he died 2. Darwin A) replied to the criticism only of those who attacked his theory scientifically B) was discouraged when he received such severe attacks from the scientists C) was an anti-Christian who had been trying to alter the moral values of society D) was able to find only a few supporters with his theory of evolution E) also used unrepeatable words for those who had attacked him so severely 3. It is stated in the passage that A) B) Darwin had missed some facts about the origin of species Darwin couldn't answer some of the questions satisfactorily for fear that he would be isolated from other Christians C) . Darwin received the most severe attacks from those who had the least knowledge of his theory D) Darwin became confident only when a few of his close friends helped him spread his teachings E) none of Darwin's previous books had caused such a quarrel among the public We now know there are four of malarial parasite and all of them are transmitted by female Anopheles mosquitoes. 2. The unexpected arrival of the President at the conference caused quite a amongst the delegates. 3. Most English words have their in Latin. 4. Toy Story was a movie that appealed to the young and the old 5. The recent cold has probably been the cause of the current flu epidemic. ELS 163 The parent sees that when the child is absorbed in work or play, the instruction passes over his head he pays no attention. But at night, when he cuddles up on his mother's knee and loves her very much, and wants complete rest and a sense of security, she is apt to fail him and to cheat him of his wish by beginning her moral lesson of how she would like her little boy to behave. This completely spoils his sense of security and rest, and sets up a mental struggle, a wish to defend himself, which is a great cause of fatigue, for fatigue is at all times brought about much more by psychic than by physical experience. Moral instruction should be kept for an early hour in the day, when the creative impulse in the child is fresh. It will then do much less harm. Because a sense of inferiority is very easily set up in children, and because it is one of the most destructive of those neurotic disorders which incapacitate us for living, this advice should be followed strictly by parents wishing to bring up healthy children. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as ruin g) initiate start (phrase) h) argument in the mind (phrase) i) exhaustion j) of the mind k) of the body I) the motivation to create (phrase) m) undervaluing oneself (phrase) n) disturbance of the mind (phrase) o) make unable handicap 164 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. It is pointed out in the passage that A) criticism made at a wrongly-chosen time has a destructive effect on the child B) moral instruction should be given around the time of the action which necessitates it C) the child's play shouldn't be interrupted for criticism, for it makes him act in a defensive manner D) when the child is criticized severely, he loses his sense of security and rest E) the child, not given proper moral instruction, will become spoilt 2. It is emphasized in the passage that A) parents should be constructive in their criticism, not destructive B) the child should be directed to create something worthwhile instead of being criticized all the time C) the child must be given moral instruction however harmful it may be, or he won't learn the moral values of society D) the child should be criticized in a low voice rather than a loud one so that the criticism can be E) the harmful effect of criticism can be reduced by choosing a proper time for it effective 3. The writer A) is opposed to giving the child moral instruction B) says that if the child has a sense of inferiority, he will eventually become more mischievous C) warns parents to be careful about when to criticize their children D) states that when the child is tricked by unbelievable explanations, he loses confidence in his parents E) points out that any failure of the child causes great fatigue in him Every evening, I like nothing better than to with a good book in front of an open fire. 2. He finds it very difficult to make new friends because of his great 3. The driver was so in changing the cassette that he didn't see the other car and collided with it. 4. Overcome with 5. She's so gullible that she the climbers were unable to complete the final ascent. to believe whatever you tell her. ELS 165 Indeed, people were scared to enter it at first in case the dome collapsed. The designs were drawn up by Anthemius of Tralles, a noted mathematician, and Isidorus of Miletus, the last head of the Athens Academy. Colour was provided by stone and marble brought from other parts of the Justinian empire red from the temple of Boalbek and green from Ephesus. At one time it was bright with golden ornaments and chandeliers. With the Turkish conquest in 1453, it became a mosque, with the addition of the corner minarets, and many of the decorations were concealed with whitewash. These were gradually restored by Thomas Whittemore, of the Byzantine Museum of America, after the building became a museum on the instructions of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk in 1933. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as the roof of a mosque j) causing a feeling of being small, helpless, and astonished k) go against refuse to obey I) the force which makes things stay on or drop to the ground instead of staying in the air m) well-known admired n) building used for worship o) thing used for decoration p) something hanging from the ceiling which consists of several branches of lights q) hide 166 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Since 1933, Hagia Sophia A) has had several minarets added B) has been a mosque C) has been the largest building in the world D) has been a museum E) has had some more pillars added 2. With its immense structure, Hagia Sophia A) is the largest building in the world B) has always frightened people C) is still the biggest church D) has survived several big fires in its history E) was once unique in the world 3. We can conclude from the passage that A) the materials used to build Hagia Sophia were brought from several places B) the Byzantine Museum of America took charge of Hagia Sophia after a long struggle C) the Byzantines had whitewashed most of the decorations in Hagia Sophia to conceal them from the Ottomans D) most of the golden ornaments and chandeliers in Hagia Sophia were destroyed during the war E) in 1933, Atatürk assigned Thomas Whittemore to restore the decorations in Hagia Sophia 1. The girl's face was partially 2. Despite constant warnings, the children still by an enormous hat. the notices not to swim in the river. 3. When she looked from the tenth floor apartment window she found the height so 4. The company's new ship is so it made her afraid. that it can carry over three thousand passengers. 5. He was found guilty of murder, but acquitted of several other charges. ELS 167 Two years later, a second expedition set off from England to join them. However, when they arrived, they found the settlement deserted. There were no indications of where the settlers had gone, nor any sign of a struggle, but just one word mysteriously scratched on a tree Croatoan . This was the name of a nearby island where the Indians were known to be friendly, but a trip to the island showed that the settlers had never arrived there. One theory is that they travelled inland, up into the hills of Appalachia, and settled there. No one knows why they might have done this, but fifty years later, when European explorers arrived in Tennessee, the Cherokee Indians told them that there was a group of pale people living in the hills already, people who wore clothes and had long beards. No one ever found this mysterious community. But in a remote and neglected corner of the Appalachians, high up in northeastern Tennessee, there still live some curious people called Melungeons, who have been there for as long as anyone can remember. The Melungeons have most of the characteristics of Europeans - blue eyes, fair hair, lanky build - but a dark, almost Negroid skin coloring that is distinctly non-European. They have English family names, but no one, including the Melungeons themselves, has any idea of where they come from or what their early history might have been. They are as much of a mystery as the lost settlers of Roanoke Island. Indeed, it has been suggested that they may be the lost settlers of Roanoke. (Adapted from The Lost Continent by Bill Bryson) Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as hunt, etc. c) empty because everyone has left d) signs, clues which give you an idea about something e) make marks on something using something sharp f) away from the sea towards the middle of a country g) people who travel to a place to find out about it, because they have never been there before h) light in colour, especially for skin i) far from other places and people j) unusual strange interesting k) tall and thin, often looking clumsy I) having the physical features of black Africans m) very clearly 168 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The second expedition from England to Roanoke Island A) was lost mysteriously and never found B) established the first colony there C) arrived there two years after the first D) preferred to settle down in Croatoan, where the Indians were friendly E) joined the first expedition two years later 2. Although it hasn't been proved, A) the first settlers of Roanoke are believed to have been killed by the Indians B) Melungeons are thought to be descendants of the lost settlers of Roanoke C) the boat carrying the first expedition might have capsized on her way to the island D) the Indians living in Croatoan might have concealed something from the searchers E) the indications of a struggle in the deserted settlement of the first expedition meant they had been attacked 3. No one has definitely been able to say that Melungeons are the lost settlers of Roanoke, because A) there are some other theories about the origins of Melungeons B) Melungeons themselves claim to be descended from Cherokee Indians, living in Tennessee C) historians say Melungeons have never settled on Roanoke Island D) some of the information found out about the mysterious disappearance of the first settlers was confusing E) there is no information available as to their ancestry 1. The cat viciously the man's hand. 2. Bright pink is a very 3. You're looking very 4. This milk has a 5. The kidnappers took their hostage to a colour to paint your living room. . Are you sure you feel okay. cheesy flavour. I don't think it's fresh. part of the island. ELS 169 Unfortunately, that message has not gotten through to the average American, who would rather try switching to light beer and low-calorie bread than increase physical exertion. The Centers for Disease Control, for example, found that fewer than one-fourth of overweight adults who were trying to shed pounds said they were combining exercise with their diet. In rejecting exercise, some people may be unduly discouraged by caloric expenditure charts for example, one would have to briskly walk three miles just to work off the 275 calories in one scrumptious Danish pastry. Even exercise professionals concede half a point here. Exercise by itself is a very tough way to lose weight, says York Onnen, program director of the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports. Still, exercise's supporting role in weight reduction is vital. A study at the Boston University Medical Center of overweight police officers and other public employees confirmed that those who dieted without exercise regained almost all their old weight, while those who worked exercise into their daily routine maintained their new weight. If you have been sedentary and decide to start walking one mile a day, the added exercise could burn an extra 100 calories daily. By increasing the distance of your walks gradually land making other dietary adjustments, you may lose even more weight. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as unnecessarily excessively j) using of bodily energy (phrase) k) quickly energetically I) exercise to get rid of (phrase) m) extremely delicious n) admit accept something is true, often unwillingly o) agree say something is true, because you have the information about it p) not moving sitting down a lot q) changes in order to make suitable 170 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, it is apparent that A) more and more people are beginning to realize the importance of exercise in losing weight B) walking briskly doesn't help one to lose weight C) more people choose to lose weight merely by dieting D) one should walk at least three miles a day for a quick result E) obesity is common especially among police officers and public employees 2. The writer states that A) if they knew the caloric expenditure charts, people would be motivated to take up exercise B) people are demoralized upon seeing how much activity is needed to burn off a certain number of calories. C) people can speed up the process of losing weight by choosing vigorous exercise D) leading a routine life plays an important part in long-term maintenance of body weight E) exercise professionals don't believe in the use of exercise in losing weight 3. It can be concluded from the passage that A) people who have reduced their weight by exercising never put on weight again B) it is inevitable for people who have sedentary occupations to put on weight C) extremely delicious food, such as Danish pastries, can be tempting for people with an appetite D) one should include exercise in daily life in order not to regain the weight lost E) 100 calories daily is the advised amount to be burnt in order to lose weight 1. Reading, for me, 2. He education with pleasure. that he had made a few mistakes, but not that he was completely wrong. 3. Her application for the post was because of her lack of experience. 4. Paul wasn't in the office, I thought he was probably ill. When I phoned his wife she that he was, by saying that he had a fever. 5. This dress will need a few before you can wear it. f Employees work hard and do hours of unpaid overtime to make their firms more efficient. If necessary, they give up weekends with the family to go on business trips. They are loyal to their organizations and they are totally involved with them. The system of lifetime employment creates a strong link between the enterprise and its workforce. It covers about 35% of the working population. Generally, when a person joins a firm after leaving high school or university, he expects to stay with that firm until he retires. He has a secure job for life. Therefore, he will not be laid off if the company no longer needs him because there is no work. Instead, it will retrain him for another position. The pay of a worker depends on his seniority, that is to say, on the years he has been with the firm. The longer he stays there, the higher his salary will be. When he is 30 or 40 years old, therefore, he cannot afford to change jobs. If he did move, he would also lose valuable fringe benefits. Promotion depends on seniority as well. Japanese managers are rarely very young, and chief executives are at least 60, and very often 70 years old. The Japanese have a special way of making decisions. They call it the consensus system. This is how it works when a firm is thinking of taking a certain action, it encourages workers at all levels to discuss the proposal and give their opinions. The purpose is to reach a consensus, or general agreement. As soon as everyone agrees on the right course of action, the decision is taken. Because of this method, a group of workers, rather than one person, is responsible for company policies. One advantage of this is that decisions come from a mixture of experience from the top, the middle, and the bottom of an enterprise. Another advantage is that junior staff frequently suggest ideas for change. A disadvantage, perhaps, is that decision-making can be slow. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as pension, car, etc. (phrase) f) advancement into a more important position at work g) most important members of a company (phrase) h) lower level employees (phrase) I72 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. In Japan, the companies and their employees have a close relationship A) in order to increase the level of productivity B) as Japanese culture values work more than family life C) so that the workers won't look for work elsewhere D) despite the amount of unpaid overtime they have to do E) because so many people are employed for life 2. If there is no longer any work for a Japanese employee A) it is impossible to find another job B) retirement is the only option C) the company doesn't dismiss him but trains him for another job D) the company will continue to provide the essentials for his family E) his fringe benefits will be taken away 3. Although the Japanese consensus system can mean that decisions are not made quickly A) no workers are excluded due to their position or lack of experience B) at least when the decision is reached everyone will be happy C) it is much more efficient than systems in other countries D) they can ensure that the decision comes from those most qualified to make it E) the advantage is that company policy will be consistent 1. Thousands of workers have because of the dreadful economic situation. 2. Her 3. One of the most important qualities to be found in your friends is that they are 4. to company director both surprised and delighted us all. Our actual salary isn't very high, but we receive so many that it doesn't really matter. 5. Despite his in the company, he always treats all the staff as equals. ELS 173 Temperamentally there are male as well as female introverts and extroverts, fiercely brave women as well as fiercely brave men, shy and gentle men as well as shy and gentle women. Every society emphasizes an expected personality for each sex. Sometimes both men and women are expected to have the same kind of personality. That is, both men and women are expected to be outgoing, active people or, on the contrary, introspective, meditative people. In cultures where this is so, sex differences are reflected in the particular ways in which a woman and a man are expected to behave and the activities each is expected to engage in. In other cultures it is expected that the personalities of women and men will be complementary. The personality of women is based on one set of temperamental traits and that of men on another. In such a culture women may be expected to be passive, gentle and modest, while men may be expected to be active and self-assertive in whatever activities persons of either sex engage in. m On the basis of research I have carried out, I believe that there are male and 1 female versions of the same temperament. Temperamentally there are male as well I as female introverts and extroverts, fiercely brave women as well as fiercely brave I men, shy and gentle men as well as shy and gentle women. Every society I emphasizes an expected personality for each sex. Sometimes both men and women are expected to have the same kind of personality. That is, both men and women 1 are expected to be outgoing, active people or, on the contrary, introspective, 1 meditative people. In cultures where this is so, sex differences are reflected in the particular ways in which a woman and a man are expected to behave and the 1 activities each is expected to engage in. In other cultures it is expected 1 that the personalities of women and men will be complementary. The personality of I women is based on one set of temperamental traits and that of men on another. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The expectations about men's and women's personalities A) develop from the way in which people perceive their own parents B) can make it difficult for them to have any individuality C) vary according to the society they live in D) dictate that men and women should behave in the same way E) are different depending on whether the person is in public or not 2. The writer thinks that men and women can have the same temperament in different forms because A) he has made investigations into this subject B) he believes there are only two basic types of people introverts and extroverts C) cultures will not allow any personality differences D) they learn their behaviour from each other E) basic human character is essentially the same for everyone 3. In some cultures, the personalities of men and women A) are so similar that it is difficult to differentiate between them B) are very critically observed and judged C) cannot be regarded separately D) are expected to balance each other E) cause many conflicts between the two sexes 1. The way a person decorates his house usually his personality. 2. I've invited him to come out with us on several occasions, but he is such a/an that he prefers to stay at home. 3. The fire blazed 4. for many hours before they managed to put it out. to book a holiday myself, we would have ended up going nowhere. 5. The book made gave so many new ideas to him that he was quiet and for many days. I Imagine living next door to Luciano Pavarotti. You love the big guy, but his fullthroated practice sessions are rattling the china. To silence the booming tenor, you could do one of three things ask him to practice his Puccini outside wear earplugs around your apartment or put some rock music on your CD player, crank up the volume, and drown out Pavarotti's voice. The last option wouldn't be smart, obviously, since you'd only be creating more noise. But what if the sounds coming from your CD were the acoustic mirror image of the sound waves coming out of Pavarotti's mouth. Instead of doubling the amount of noise, they would actually cancel it out, zap it from the air. What you'd be left with is peace and quiet. The idea of stifling Pavarotti or any human voice by scientific means is a bit fanciful, of course. But the theory behind it - something acoustics scientists call antinoise - is not. In fact, some of the biggest electronics companies in Japan take the concept seriously and, together with a few small American firms, are making active noise control (ANC) devices to help quiet the daily din. These are small but sophisticated sound systems that analyze noise digitally and then - almost instantaneously generate equal but inverse sound waves, or antinoise. For most industrial noise, that means reducing the sound level by 50 to 70 percent. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as d) making a loud, deep, echoing sound e) switch on or turn up (quickly) and to a very high level (phrase) f) make one sound so loud that it is impossible to hear another (phrase) g) clever h) reflection which is either exactly the same, or the same but reversed (phrase) i) eliminate by shooting j) stop from continuing suppress k) imaginary not based on reality I) long-lasting, loud and unpleasant noise m) immediately without delay n) reversed exactly opposite 176 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, the new device A) can make the noise it's aimed at 10 to 15 decibels quieter B) lowers all industrial noise by at least half C) generates sound waves of 10 to 15 decibels D) can weaken a noise of 10 to 15 decibels by 50 to 70 per cent E) instantaneously reduces noise to a level of 10 to 15 decibels 2. According to the writer, it is unrealistic to A) wear earplugs to block out noise B) expect to live in peace and quiet C) take the theory of antinoise seriously D) suppress human voices scientifically E) 3. The device manufactured by some Japanese and American firms A) has solved the problem of industrial noise B) generates sound waves which are much louder than the targeted noise C) produces sound waves which partially cancel out the problem noise D) is not big enough to be able to eliminate all noise E) reflects the problem sound waves back onto themselves 1. That child is obviously very because she can already beat just about anybody at cards or video games, and she's only seven. 2. With so much traffic on the roads it is to think you can drive to work in just ten minutes. 3. We must get that window fixed. Everytime the wind blows, you can hear it in its frame. 4. Being able to understand words and sentences , without having to translate them first, is a sign of good progress when learning a language. 5. We were unable to continue with the lesson because the noise from the building work the teacher's voice. ELS 177 There is no quicker method of disposing of patients than by giving them what they are asking for, and since most medical personnel in the health services are overworked and have little time for offering time-consuming and little-appreciated advice on such subjects as diet, right living, and the need for abandoning bad habits, etc., the bottle, the box, and the jar are almost always granted to them. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 178 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Most outpatients assess the quality of the treatment on A) how overworked the doctors are B) the speed at which they are dealt with C) whether they are given any medicine D) the standard of the advice they receive E) the willingness of the doctor to help them 2. According to the passage, generally doctors A) have abandoned their bad habits B) do not provide adequate treatment C) won't give patients what they ask for D) are too busy to give advice E) are very skeptical about medicines 3. The writer states that people A) have always trusted medicine B) think that outpatient departments don't give good treatment C) no longer have confidence in doctors D) are unaware of how overworked medical men are E) never ask doctors for advice 1. My boss has me permission to have a few days off work next week. 2. Some people supported the scheme, but most were as to its chances of success. 3. There are no 4. You'll find some 5. She reasons for me to dislike him. It's just a feeling I have. in the bathroom cabinet. It'll help soothe that wound. supports her husband in everything he does. ELS 179 It is overlooked by brooding hills and wild moorland - the perfect setting for strange and unexplained events. In 1933, a motorist on the new lakeside road saw a tremendous upheaval in the loch*. The waters churned and boiled as a huge monster, its body the size of a whale, broke the surface. The incident was reported in the local paper, and soon the national press was buzzing with news of what came to be called The Loch Ness Monster. But legends of large water creatures in Loch Ness go back much further than 1933. In the 6th century AD, the Irish missionary Saint Columba was said to have banished a monster which had attacked a swimmer. And local folk tales, going back centuries, speak of water horses and water bulls inhabiting Loch Ness. Scientists have seriously suggested that large creatures may have been stranded in the loch, when 60 million years ago it was cut off from the sea. Perhaps their descendants live there still. But despite hazy photographs, mostly highly magnified, of strange humps in the water, there is very little evidence, as yet, to go on. *The Scottish word for lake . Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as bubble show a lot of activity g) send away and not allow to return, as a punishment h) be unable to leave a place be stuck i) not clear or distinct j) make bigger (in appearance) k) round lumps, (e.g. on the back of a camel) 180 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The legends about the Loch Ness Monster A) were first reported in 1933 B) stem from the times when water bulls and horses lived in the loch C) are based on scientific evidence D) originated hundreds of years ago E) were passed on by Irish missionaries 2. We can infer that Loch Ness A) is full of the descendants of large creatures B) used to be connected to the sea C) is very popular with photographers D) usually has hazy weather E) is deeper than most other lakes 3. According to the writer, A) monsters have lived in Loch Ness for 60 million years B) the water in Loch Ness is a very high temperature C) nobody has actually seen the Loch Ness monster D) the Loch Ness monster looks like a whale E) the surroundings of Loch Ness are the ideal location for unusual happenings 1. When we ran out of money on holiday we thought we would , but fortunately we were able to borrow some to pay for our journey home. 2. The worst thing about moving house is all the it causes. It takes ages to get things back into order. 3. The room we had in the hotel had a lovely, large balcony 4. It was a really the sea. day, so we could hardly see the mountains on the other side of the bay. 5. When studying the cells of a plant in biology, you have to the images several times so that they can be seen clearly. ELS 181 It is perhaps the world's most deadly fish, yet in Japan the honorable fugu is the perfect example of gourmet dining. With its lazy, almost feeble way of swimming, the puffer fish gives no hint of its deadly nature. Here is no shark knifing through the water, with gleaming jaws agape but the poison hidden in the puffer's entrails makes it fearsome indeed. About 100 species of puffers in several closely related families can be found throughout the world. Their most obvious characteristic is their ability to change from a reasonable fish shape into a sphere two or three times larger. When frightened, excited, or annoyed, they gulp water, or even air, into a sac on the belly. It swells inside their tough, elastic skin, like an inner tube inside a tire, so as to discourage predators or intimidate rivals. When the fish feels safe, it squirts out the water or releases the air, deflating to its normal shape. * Ian Fleming author of the James Bond novels Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 182 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. In its appearance, the puffer fish A) resembles a shark with its jaws open B) looks as if it would taste delicious C) is both extraordinary and fearsome D) doesn't seem to be deadly E) looks like no other creature in the sea 2. In certain situations, the puffer fish A) squirts water at its rivals B) hides its deadly nature by swimming feebly C) can increase in size D) will even attack sharks E) inflicts a poisonous bite 3. Despite its deadly poison, the puffer fish A) is a much favored delicacy in Japan B) is frequently preyed upon by other fish C) never feels safe when other sea creatures are nearby D) prefers to attack its enemies with its teeth E) cannot adequately defend itself 1. I thought the bill for that meal was quite especially considering the huge portions they served. 2. After her fall, her knee up to nearly twice its normal size. 3. The children had a lot of fun water at each other using old liquid dishsoap bottles. 4. The chairman tried to several of the board members into voting for him at the next election, but failed completely. 5. The golden dome of the mosque could, on a sunny day, be seen for miles. ELS 183 It served to remind them of the danger that constantly menaced the continued existence of their state - the danger of an uprising of the enormous slave population, which might destroy the Roman nation. Scholars have calculated that in ancient Italy the slaves outnumbered the free citizens 3 to 1. If these slaves, who resented the brutal treatment they received as household and plantation labourers, had succeeded in uniting under capable leadership, no armies could have withstood them. There were many slave uprisings in the history of Rome, but the most formidable was that headed by Spartacus in 73 BC. After escaping from the school of gladiators at Capua, he fled to Mount Vesuvius, where he collected an army of runaway slaves like himself. For two years he terrorized Italy, defeating army after army sent against him from Rome. The insurrection was finally crushed by the Roman commander Marcus Licinius Crassus. Spartacus and 6,000 of his followers were slain. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as be larger in number g) the people of a nation h) feel angry and bitter about i) rough and cruel j) people who do the work on a large farm (two words) k) having ability effective I) resist remain unharmed m) hard to overcome strong and powerful n) escaped [adjective] o) frighten people by using violence p) rebellion revolt q) be destroyed be finished off r) be killed 184 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Spartacus's name made the Romans afraid because A) he was a very aggressive and dangerous man B) his attitude towards other slaves was brutal C) he could get support from other nations D) he was a symbol of the danger of a slave rebellion E) he was supported by a number of officers in the Roman army 2. According to scholars, in ancient Italy, A) the slave population was almost as big as that of Roman citizens B) every family owned at least three slaves C) there were more slaves than free citizens D) some of the slaves were specially educated E) slaves sometimes overthrew their masters 3. The author believes that a unity of slaves headed by a capable leader A) played a major role in battles against Roman forces B) would have been strong enough to beat any army C) helped Spartacus win the battle at Mount Vesuvius D) would increase production on plantations E) would still find it extremely hard to resist experienced Roman soldiers 1. I wasn't too surprised to learn that the girls the boys in the ballet class by 10 to 1. 2. Beginning in the 13th century, the Italian cities built merchant fleets, acquired islands and coastal territories as commercial bases, and soon established a rich trade in spices, indigo, and other Eastern goods. 3. Karen really the fact that her male colleagues are doing the same job as her but earning more. 4. You don't need to worry about Molly - she's quite of looking after herself. 5. Steve that he would be able to afford a decent holiday if he managed to save about £15 a week. This continuity results largely from the nature of the written language itself. It is the use of characters, not letters as in Western languages, that is most important in the Chinese language. The characters stand for things or ideas and so, unlike groups of letters, they cannot, and need never be, sounded. Thus Chinese could be read by people in all parts of the country in spite of gradual changes in pronunciation, the emergence of regional dialects, and modification of the characters. The dominance of the written language has had significant effects on the development of the literature. In handwriting or in print, a piece of literature has visual appeal. This has given rise to the great respect that calligraphy enjoys in China, where it has been regarded for at least sixteen centuries as a fine art comparable to painting. The main disadvantage of written Chinese, however, is the great number of characters it contains Even basic reading and writing require a knowledge of more than 1,000 characters. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as represent (phrase) g) (be) spoken h) happening slowly and by degrees i) the state of something developing and becoming known coming into existence j) a variety of a language that is spoken in one part of a country k) a slight change made to something I) importance power controlling influence m) noticeable important n) the power to attract the eye {phrase) o) lead to be the cause of (phrase) p) the art of producing beautiful handwriting using a brush or a special pen q) not less than having equal value 186 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, Chinese literature A) contains literary forms that no other countries have B) is the largest in the world in terms of the number of works it contains C) has been produced using the same script for over three millenia D) appeals to the eye rather than to the mind E) can claim the oldest literary work, which was written about 3,000 years ago 2. The main reason why written Chinese has changed so little over the years is that A) the Chinese start learning to write at an early age B) writing is a highly-prized art in China C) China has always been a large country in area D) the Chinese all have much the same ideas E) it bears no relationship to the spoken word 3. It's clear from the passage that calligraphy A) is as important and valued in China as painting B) emerged in China in the 16th century C) is the written form of the Chinese language D) is considered easier by the Chinese than painting E) contains 1,000 different characters in the Chinese language There have been many changes to the company this year. The most improvement has been the opening of a day-care centre on the company premises. 2. Since its about 500,000 to 2 million years ago, the human being has become the most destructive species on Earth. 3. When Windows 95 was first introduced, there were several problems with it, but it has since undergone a number of 4. and it is now a very effective program. Bates, but I have never managed to find out what the initials in his name 5. Kim attends Spanish classes on three days a week, but she feels it would be more useful if the classes were spread out over the week. ELS 187 j They were the first presidential couple born in the 20th century. She brought grace, style, and a flair for beauty to the White House, quickly becoming a celebrity in her own right. She was better-educated than most of her predecessors, having studied at Vassar, Smith, George Washington University, and the University of Paris. She-was working for the Washington Times-Herald when John Kennedy met her in 1952. She and John Kennedy married on September 12, 1953. They had two children. As the President's wife, she was a very accomplished hostess and a patron of the arts. After President Kennedy's assassination in November 1963, Mrs. Kennedy moved to New York City. In 1968, she married the Greek shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis, who died in 1975. In 1978 she began working as an editor for Doubleday and Company publishers in New York. She and her children were rarely out of the media spotlight until her death in 1994. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as (phrase) 188 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. John F. Kennedy A) met his wife-to-be while she was completing her education B) was killed in New York City for political reasons C) married someone who had been working for the media D) was considerably less famous than his glamorous wife E) was the first American President of the twentieth century 2. Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy Onassis A) was the only first lady until then who had graduated from two universities B) was living in New York when she and Kennedy first met C) was publishing an obscure newspaper before she met and married Kennedy D) had received a better education than the majority of the previous presidential wives E) was a great supporter of the arts when Kennedy met her 3. it is clear from the passage that Jacqueline A) died because of too much attention from the media B) became an artist herself after Aristotle Onassis's death C) didn't work for a paying employer during her lifetime D) became less popular after John Kennedy's death E) remained married to Kennedy for about a decade The office staff found it difficult to accept the new manager because they had all loved his , who had retired. 2. The failure of the business was to the owner's lack of ambition. Because he didn't have the motivation, he never really did enough work and that's largely why it didn't succeed. 3. The of the American President Abraham Lincoln took place in a theatre. He was shot while he was watching a play. 4. One of the Spice Girls used to live in my mother's street before she became a/an however, since she's become famous, she's moved to a more expensive area. 5. Sally isn't interested in marrying a wealthy man, but she would like to become rich and therefore, intends to have a successful career. Because of his concern for form and precise detail, he often struggled for days searching for exactly the right word . He took five years to write Madame Bovary, his best-known work. Flaubert's goal was to write faultless prose. In Madame Bovary, which tells of Emma Bovary's revolt against her middle-class environment, Flaubert reveals his own great contempt for the bourgeoisie. This group, he felt, was opposed to art and hated everything that it could not put to use. When Madame Bovary first appeared in 1856, as a magazine serial - Flaubert was brought to trial for publishing a morally offensive work. He was acquitted in 1857, and in the same year, the novel came out in book form. During his later years, Flaubert spent the winter in Paris, where he held literary gatherings. Flaubert never married, and died on May 8th, 1880. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as perfect g) ordinary written language as distinct from poetry h) rebellion strong reaction against something i) physical and social conditions in which people live and which influence their lives j) show make something known to people k) total lack of respect for someone or something I) the middle class m) unsupportive of be against n) a story appearing in parts that are published regularly o) (be) taken to a court of law to be tried and judged (phrase) p) having a bad effect on people's minds because of ideas which are considered to be wrong or unacceptable to society (phrase) q) (be) found not guilty of a crime in a court of law r) a meeting or coming together of a group of people 190 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Flaubert took five years to write Madame Bovary because A) he was lazy and didn't often work B) he was an exact and careful writer C) he wanted it to be his best novel D) his handwriting was very poor E) he made a lot of mistakes at first 2. Flaubert's trial A) was written about in a series of magazines in 1856 B) came about because his book wasn't well-written C) caused Flaubert to lose popularity in society D) took place because his writing offended some people E) became the subject of the following novel he wrote 3. As mentioned in the passage, in the novel Madame Bovary, A) Flaubert's personal feelings about the middle class are reflected B) the character of Emma Bovary is based on a real person C) Flaubert wrote about a working class woman who led a revolt D) the plot was the attitude of the bourgeoisie towards works of art E) Flaubert's scorn for his central character, Emma Bovary, is apparent Many British people are to the introduction of a single European currency - they'd much rather keep the British pound than change to the European euro. 2. My friend Dan is a professional magician and he can do some wonderful tricks. I've often asked him to show me how he does them, but he always replies that a magician must never his secrets. 3. The little boy had to to open the gate - he wasn't quite tall enough, so it was very difficult for him. 4. Although Dawn had had respect for her manager, when she discovered that he'd been stealing from the company pension fund, she felt nothing but 5. for him. I don't think that Susan wrote this essay herself. ELS 191 Various writers have pointed out that man's basic needs are being extensively thwarted by the demands of society. According to this view, man no longer may be an individual or develop his imagination, reason, and creative powers and he is prevented, because of society's compartmentalizing, from achieving feelings of relatedness - of loving and being loved. Because of the competitive demands of civilization, man now strives for things rather than for his own development. He feels himself to be merely a pawn rather than a contributing member of society. If he rebels, he is subject to punishment by society but if, on the other hand, he submits, he may become simply a stereotyped, pedestrian member of society and thus lose much of his urge toward creativity and individuality. As an example, the psychologist Erich Fromm suggests that society produces in its members what he calls a socially patterned defect. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 192 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, it seems that A) disorders such as mental illness are not uncommon B) man is becoming more and more stereotyped C) there are no longer any contributing members of society D) the development of the group culture must be emphasized E) men are neither imaginative nor creative these days 2.