Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. From the information in the passage, we can assume that Robinson Crusoe was A) an accurate historical account of British piracy B) a mixture of fact and fiction describing adventures at sea C) the handwritten diary of the British sailor Alexander Selkirk D) a pamphlet about the cruel treatment of Dissenters E) Daniel Defoe's first periodical 2. Defoe became a writer, although, as mentioned in the passage A) he had been a pirate B) he had been unable to pay his debts C) he preferred speculating on the stock market D) he knew relatively little about geography E) he had trained to become a priest 3. We learn from the passage that, in order to emphasize the problems of his time, Defoe would A) preach to religious congregations B) use his great knowledge of geography C) write in French, Italian and Spanish D) ridicule established practices E) make fun of the statesman Robert Harley The ancient game of ninepin bowling, known in England as skittles, was a/an of modern American tenpin bowling. 2. The of the Bosnian Muslims was allowed to continue for three years before the international community decisively intervened. 3. I always thought that my grandfather had led a commonplace life until I read his which were full of war, romance and adventure. 4. The poet Robert Burns not only wrote fine but also kept an interesting diary. 5. I enquired at the health centre about the new vaccination and they gave me a useful which explains all the advantages and possible side effects. ELS 301 They refer to themselves as backpackers because they can be roughly defined as travellers that travel with a rucksack instead of a suitcase. Backpackers need specialized equipment that is both durable and extremely lightweight. Tents, sleeping bags, cooking stoves and even special food that is light enough to be carried for great distances can be purchased at stores that sell camping equipment. Most gear is carried in a backpack. A typical American backpack is designed to be attached to a metal frame that distributes the weight evenly across the wearer's shoulders and hips. Rucksacks, backpacks without metal frames, are more popular in Europe. Backpackers often go hiking and camping, backpacking in the other sense, but they more often explore more urban settings. United in having slim wallets as well as a passion for the exotic, they seek out low-cost options such as standby flights, youth hostels, and buying food at supermarkets abroad instead of going to restaurants. They often assemble in beautiful places with low costs of living such as Goa (India), Essaouira (Morocco), or Thailand. They are generally very social, and a highlight for many backpackers is meeting others like themselves on the road. They are quick to share advice on great sites, cheap accommodations and email addresses. Many strive to meet locals wherever they visit but find that the loose network of backpackers makes them feel at home instantly in a foreign country. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 302 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, backpackers A) try to avoid carrying a lot of money with them B) are usually rough people who do not like modern facilities C) are most likely to be found in cities D) don't usually carry food with them E) are generally well-educated young people 2. As described in the passage, backpackers are interested in A) finding temporary jobs in faraway places around the world B) staying in the homes of the locals that they have become friends with C) seeing unusual places in the world without spending much money D) finding the best restaurants in the cities and towns they visit E) learning as many foreign languages as possible by staying in different countries 3. According to the author of the passage, backpackers A) benefit from encounters with other backpackers B) like to travel alone and don't generally talk to the local people C) don't take much equipment with them when they travel D) are most likely to be mature people E) like to explore where no tourists have ever been before 1. Mauritius, an island in the Indian Ocean 500 miles from Madagascar, is a/an 2. In the last fifty years the place with beautiful beaches and tropical forests. area of Istanbul has grown enormously with new migrants coming to the city. 3. If you are under twenty-five and want to see Europe on a/an , then you should buy a young person's rail card, which gives you unlimited travel at minimal expense. 4. The craze of skateboarding has created a/an among some of Britain's youth. Shops have sprung up to cater for this group, selling not only boards and equipment, but also the clothes and posters sought by this specific group of youngsters. 5. People are in their anger at the municipality turning the public park into an exclusive housing complex. ELS 303 But it has evolved to include any decorations inscribed on rocks or walls that are considered to be vandalism. However, some people consider graffiti - or at least some graffiti - an art form in this sense, it is usually denoted as urban Aerosol Art. The practices of graffiti and of considering graffiti as art are generally related to a subculture that rebels against extant societal authorities, or against authority as such. Graffiti art is considered one of the four elements of hip-hop culture. Although existing previously in primitive form, it wasn't until it achieved popularity in the New York City subway system that it took on an extravagant artistic role. After being showcased in the newspaper, the intricate tag was being mimicked by hundreds of urban youths within months. With the innovation of art, and the craving to gain the widest audience, taggers began their work. What developed was a strict adherence to spraypaint, sampling foreign calligraphy, and the much anticipated mural that usually covered an entire subway car. The movement spread to the streets, returned to the railroads - where tagging was popularized by hobos - and eventually spread nationwide, and then worldwide, with the aid of the media and of rap music. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 304 ELS . . . . . Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, graffiti as art A) was appreciated by art critics across the world B) was limited to the subways of New York C) took place only in ancient times D) makes up part of hip-hop culture E) caused an outrage among commuters 2. It is clear from the details in the passage that graffiti A) is a very profitable art form B) is considered acceptable by the authorities C) is generally regarded as a form of rebellion D) is mainly carried out by the rich and famous E) is no longer a problem on trains 3. The passage makes it clear that graffiti art was aided in its expansion by A) well-established foreign artists B) the authorities C) pizza delivery companies D) the owners of the New York subway E) music and publicity 1. The gold bracelet that he bought his girlfriend had the With Love on the inside. 2. Even small amounts of the strong drug heroin can produce an intense for more, which can eventually result in a physical addiction. 3. I'm not against graffiti but it should at least be colourful and artistic. 4. Blackboards in classrooms have largely been replaced by whiteboards, and to write on them, rather than chalk, are used. 5. Schoolchildren have painted a wonderful, colourful on the wall of the town market. ELS 305 The auto industry has come a long way from the early 20th century, when Henry Ford offered his Model-T in one flavour black. Silver and its variations are, by far, the most popular exterior finish for new cars in North America, South America and Europe, accounting for 23% of new vehicles sold. Bob Daily, colour marketing manager for the major auto paint producer Dupont Performance Coatings, explains why Silver is really a very stylish-looking colour. I think it's what people equate to things like precision and performance, he says. Mr. Daily says silver goes well with the new car designs. We're getting away from that 'carved bar of soap' design that we had in the 1980s and 1990s into more chiseled looks. Those kinds of designs are enhanced by colours like silver, as well as black and some of the other colours that are quite popular right now, he says. Black is currently number three in popularity. What's second to silver. White has been a perennially popular colour. But, surprisingly, over the past five or six years, black has come up considerably in popularity, says Mr. Daily. As one colour fades, another is on the rise, according to Mr. Daily. When green became popular in the early 1990s, blue dropped off the market for quite a while. And now blue is coming back, he says. Just a few years ago, says Daily, there were clear differences in the colours chosen by car buyers in Asia, Europe and North America. Now, with the advent of global society and instant communication, those cultural differences are disappearing. And silver is the dominant choice from Berlin to Beijing. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as lighter or darker, of a colour b) having a distinctive characteristic type, kind, or sort c) the outside of something d) the surface coating or texture of metal or wood e) consist of make up (phrasal verb) f) believe two things are the same consider as similar g) (of equipment) the quality of being carefully made accuracy h) a piece of something which is more or less rectangular i) having a clean and distinct outline as if precisely cut along the edges well-defined j) improve the value of something make better or more attractive k) at the present time (two seperate answers) I) always remaining the same repeatedly m) to a fairly great extent or degree n) become slowly less intense or strong o) the starting or coming into existence of something appearance p) happening immediately 306 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to Bob Daily, as reported in the passage, cultural differences A) mean there are distinct differences between colour choices for cars B) mean each colour has a different symbolic meaning in a society C) lead to silver being more popular in Berlin than in Beijing D) are yetting weaker with regards to car colour choice E) have rarely applied to cars as cars are produced by only a few nations 2. It is clear irom the passage that black A) is second only to silver in popularity B) is not a naturally-occurring colour C) is gradually becoming more popular than both silver and white D) is still the favourite colour Ford uses for its cars E) has become more popular recently than it used to be 3. It is clear in the passage that the Model-T Ford A) came in a huge variety of colours B) was only manufactured in one colour C) was wanted mainly in black D) was most popular in silver E) came in silver, black, and white 1. Sales during the Christmas period each year 2. Our new white wooden fence has 60% of our sales. the appearance of our garden. Now it looks much nicer than it used to. 3. People have 4. Since the left the countryside to come to the city to look for work. of personal computers, a lot of people have spent too much time sitting in front of them. 5. People often fame with happiness but the depression suffered by many celebrities shows that the two are not necessarily linked. ELS 307 While we lacked strength and speed, we were endowed with intelligence which enabled us to acquire first weapons and shelter, then fire, art, domestic animals, crops, medicines, sciences, machines and, . finally, all the blessings and curses of modern society. Throughout history, our race has been industrious and resourceful, driven by instinct to explore and discover, to invent, and to improve and protect our ways of life. Of course, these instincts exist to varying degrees in all people, and are essential to the survival of our civilization but alone they are not enough. Major progress has always called for individuals to lead the way with inventions, voyages of discovery, or other projects that have gone that one step further. Often these endeavours received little support when they were initiated typically, they were called difficult or impossible, untried or too risky, eccentric or even worthless. But the bold and energetic people who undertook them overcame adversity, succeeded and, eventually, were recognized for their achievement. Then the words used to describe them changed, and they were admired for their originality, inspiration, courage and tenacity. Why did these individuals succeed. It was because all of them possessed an extra measure of that quality which has been the catalyst of virtually all progress in our history - the spirit of enterprise . Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as (phrase) c) not wild living with, or kept by man d) something good that happens something that brings happiness e) something that causes trouble or harm f) hard-working g) good at finding things that are helpful able to solve problems h) natural feeling, or tendency to behave in a certain way i) require need {phrasal verb) j) effort attempt k) start cause to happen I) strange peculiar not normal m) without fear daring n) successfully handle (a problem, a difficulty, etc.) o) great difficulty unfavourable condition p) determination not giving up easily q) something that causes change in something else r) almost completely true, with only very small and unimportant exceptions s) quality of courage, willingness and determination to do something that is new, difficult and challenging (phrase) 308 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The spirit of enterprise A) is the extra quality that few men in history have had B) exists as an instinct to the same degree in all people C) is the characteristic common to all achievers D) has developed over the course of evolution E) has only developed in modern times 2. According to the writer, A) to explore and discover is instinctive in man B) most people are bold and energetic C) there have been many eccentric people in world history D) early endeavours were typically risky, or even worthless E) modern society is more cursed than blessed 3. According to the passage, many of those possessing the spirit of enterprise A) lived in the past, when mankind needed many things to survive B) took courage from the support they were given C) were sometimes overcome by opposition from society D) used to be criticized severely if they couldn't succeed in anything E) were appreciated only after they achieved success 1. Despite facing numerous on the expedition, they managed to complete it successfully. 2. The group has a project which they hope will result in better protection for the birds in the reservoir area. 3. Although he is extremely and certainly couldn't be accused of laziness, he doesn't seem capable of making decisions for himself. 4. News this good definitely a celebration. Let's go and buy some champagne. 5. His to get the support of his co-workers have all ended in failure. ELS 309 Today the committee is responsible for maintaining the regular celebration of the Olympic Games seeing that the Games are carried out in the spirit that inspired their revival and promoting the development of amateur sport throughout the world. The original committee in 1894 consisted of 14 members in addition to Pierre Coubertin - the leader of the movement aiming to restart the Olympic Games of ancient Greece - and since then, membership has been self-perpetuating. Convinced that the downfall of the ancient Olympic Games had been caused by outside influences that undermined the spirit of the Games, Coubertin felt that the revived Games would go the same way unless they were in the hands of people whose concern was to keep the spirit of amateur sport alive and who were responsible in no way to any outside influences. They are in no sense delegates to the committee and may not accept from the government of their country, or from any organization or individual, any instructions that in any way affect their independence. Each member - the present membership is about 70 - must speak French or English and be a citizen of or reside in a country that has a National Olympic Committee. With very few exceptions, there is only one member from any one country. Members were originally elected for life, but anyone elected after 1965 must retire at the age of 75. a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) i) j) k) I) m) 312 Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, the International Olympic Committee A) offers prize money to Olympic competitors B) consults the governments of competing countries on the planning of games C) ensures that events reflect what was planned for the modern games D) was originally made up only of French and English members E) is made up of men over the age of 70 2. The author points out that members of the International Olympic Committee A) are also members of their country's National Olympic Committee B) are never forced to retire C) are all former amateur sportsmen D) have to live in Switzerland permanently E) operate independently of their national governments 3. were able to speak both French and English B) were members of the organization until the end of their lives C) used to be members of the organization for 75 years D) had to live in the country that they represented E) were able to represent more than one country The people of the city have this politician with representing them in parliament. 2. The behind the Nobel Peace Prize is to reward those who try to make our planet less violent. 3. In support of the increased interest in natural medicine, there has been a/an of natural birth techniques, backed by the Natural Childbirth Society. 4. Because of accelerated agricultural productivity since 1950, it has been estimated that about one-fifth to one-third of the world's farmable topsoil is being eroded at a rate that will seriously 5. future productivity. Although my brother is a Turkish national, he in the United States because he set up his business there. ELS 313 The ancient Egyptians drank both wine and beer, and the Greeks carried on a lively trade in wine throughout the Mediterranean. Grapevines are all of a single species although there are hundreds of varieties adapted to different soils and climates. Wine is the fermented juice of fresh grapes. The juice of the wine grape contains sugar, and growths of yeast form on the outside of the grape skins. In wine-making, the grapes are crushed in a wine press and the yeast converts the sugar to alcohol, when there is no air present, by a process called fermentation. Red wine is made from dark grapes, and white wine from white grapes or from dark grapes whose skins have been removed from the wine press at an early stage. The most famous wine­ growing countries are France, Germany and Italy. Wine was made in England in the Middle Ages, but the climate is not really suitable for grapevines. Wines must be drunk quickly once they are opened otherwise, bacteria will use the air to convert the alcohol to vinegar. The bacteria are killed by a higher alcohol content than is found in wine and that is why sherry and port, the specialties of Spain and Portugal respectively, are fortified by the addition of spirits to make them last longer. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 314 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, the consumption of alcoholic drinks A) provided the Greeks with their main source of income B) dates back nearly as far as agriculture C) was a popular pastime in Ancient Egypt D) could cause problems even in ancient civilizations E) became very widespread in the Mediterranean region 2. We can infer from the passage that the skins of dark grapes A) make white wine taste bad B) have better growths of yeast on them C) are the most important factor in fermentation D) must be removed before they are pressed E) produce the colour of red wine 3. It is stated in the passage that the higher the percentage of alcohol in wine, the A) more popular it is B) easier it is to sell C) faster people get drunk D) longer life it has E) quicker it must be drunk I tried making my own bread the other day, but it was a disaster because I forgot to put the in. 2. The company have decided to that old ship into a floating restaurant. 3. He rarely drinks 4. We wouldn't have made a profit this year if it weren't for the revenue from our foreign 5. You need to eat a good breakfast to because he finds them too strong. yourself in this cold weather. ELS 315 He began his diary in 1660, the year that Puritan rule ended and the period called the Restoration began. After the sobriety of the Puritan years, Londoners now took great pleasure in attending the reopened theatres, where they enjoyed the comedies of John Dryden and other Restoration dramatists. Pepys enjoyed London life to the full, and he wrote down practically everything he thought, felt, saw or heard. He described the city's churches, theaters and taverns, its streets and homes, and even the clothes that he and his wife wore. Many momentous happenings took place during the years covered in Pepys's diary. He remained in London during the Great Plague of 1664-65, and he also saw the Great Fire of 1666. He numbered among his friends many of the well-known people of the time, including the scientist Isaac Newton, the architect Christopher Wren and the poet John Dryden. Owing to failing eyesight, Pepys regretfully closed his diary in 1669. Pepys wrote his diary in Thomas Shelton's system of shorthand, but he complicated the more confidential passages by using foreign languages and a cipher of his own invention. Upon his death, along with other books and papers, the diary went to his old college at Cambridge. It was not deciphered until 1822. In addition to its historical significance, the diary holds a high place in literature. The style is vigorous, racy and colloquial. Because he intended it to be read only by himself, Pepys was completely honest. An incomplete edition appeared in 1825, and the entire diary, except for a few passages deliberately omitted by the editors, was available by 1899. An edition completed in 1983 includes the entire work. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 316 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. Pepys's diary, according to the passage 2. A) gives an accurate account of Puritan rule in England B) gives summarized general descriptions of London in his day C) doesn't include any personal information D) was written beautifully in a language he had created himself E) describes his daily life and London in great detail It is stated in the passage that, in order to keep the meaning of some sections secret, Pepys A) locked his diary up B) deliberately omitted pages when he gave it to the publishers C) wrote in Thomas Shelton's system of shorthand D) used a code and foreign languages E) burnt sections of the book 3. Pepys's diary is, as stated in the passage, particularly interesting because A) he knew several important people and lived through some very important occurrences in London B) he describes the moderation and strictness of the Puritan era C) of the detailed accounts it gives of the churches, theaters, taverns and streets of Cambridge D) the code he used has never been solved by anyone E) it describes the experiments carried out by the scientist Isaac Newton She writes the proceedings of the meetings in for speed and then types them out later for everyone to read. 2. Although she is very ill, she enjoys life never missing an engagement. 3. Reportedly, George W. Bush once had problems with alcohol and cocaine, but since he has held the presidential office, he has been the model of 4. Retiring from his job didn't help mend my grandfather's health, and he died soon afterwards. 5. During World War II, teams of specialists were employed to German coded messages. ELS 317 The round, red berries grew wild in marshes and bogs along the East Coast. Although not unknown in England, cranberries were effectively introduced to the Pilgrims by the Indians, who used them for medicine and dyes as well as food. (The early settlers called the berries crane berries, because the white blossom and stem resembled the head and neck of a crane.) The Indians taught the Pilgrims to crush the berries with stones, combine them with dried meat and fat drippings, and form small cakes out of the mixture. These cakes, called pemmican, kept well and could be eaten throughout the winter. Americans have been devising new cranberry concoctions ever since. And in the state where the Pilgrims first harvested berries growing abundantly in the wild, the fruit has evolved into a viable commercial crop. More than half of the cranberries eaten in the US today are grown on Cape Cod. The berry is also an important crop in the states of New Jersey and Wisconsin. Cranberries are grown in cooperation with nature, in a manner that our immigrant and Native American ancestors would recognize and applaud. Pesticide use is minimal instead, geese weed the bogs and swallows harvest the unfriendly bugs. Some growers also place beehives near the bogs to promote pollination. The berries are proof that organic farming, like Thanksgiving, is a treasured part of our heritage. Harvested in September, fresh berries are readily available throughout the country in the fall. The fruit will keep between four and eight weeks if refrigerated when bought. Like most berries, they should never be washed until just before use or they'll spoil. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as u) autumn 318 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. When the cranberry was introduced to the English by the Indians, people in England A) were already growing and harvesting it B) already knew how delicious and useful it was C) immediately realized its viability as a commercial crop D) were only slightly aware of its existence E) used it for medicine and dyes as well as food 2. According to the passage, cranberries are long-lasting A) just like most other berries B) if kept in a fridge after purchase C) if they are bought frozen D) as long as they are washed E) but only available in the autumn 3. The writer states that cranberries are grown A) in the same way as the Native Americans grew them B) in a way which utilizes but doesn't harm the natural environment C) in places which are specially chosen for their bird populations D) specially to be eaten at Thanksgiving E) by people who are also bee-keepers 1. The chairman's proposal was not considered to be by the other directors and was thus rejected 2. More money should be spent on protecting the nation's for future generations. 3. Not enough time and money is spent on alternative energy sources. 4. The strong winds blew down the tree, and it completely the car that had been parked beneath it. 5. Our new teacher very English literature, especially the works of Geoffrey Chaucer. ELS 319 The environment of a town, with its buildings and traffic and its noise and smells, where everyone is on top of everyone else, is a far cry from that of the countryside, with its fields and crops, its wild and domestic animals and its feeling of spaciousness. And the environment differs in different parts of the world. Ecology is the science of how living creatures and plants exist together and depend on each other and on the local environment. Where an environment is undisturbed, the ecology of an area is in balance, but if a creature is exterminated or an alien species introduced, then the ecology of the district will be upset - in other words, the balance of nature will be disturbed. Man is a part of the environment and has done more to upset the ecology during his short span on earth than any other living creature. He has done this by his ignorance, his greed, his thoughtless folly and his wanton wastefulness. He has poisoned the atmosphere and polluted both land and water. He has squandered the earth's natural resources with no thought for the future, and has thought out the most devastating ways of killing his fellow men - and every other sort of life as well. Since man has done so much damage, it is up to man to try to put matters right - if it is not already too late. If there is to be any remedy for our ills, that remedy ultimately lies in the hands of the young, and the sooner they start doing something about it, the better. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as period of time g) lack of knowledge h) wanting too much of everything i) foolish behaviour j) without care forthe consequences k) the use of more than is necessary I) use things foolishly waste m) finally in the end 320 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The writer accuses A) some alien species of having exterminated certain creatures and disturbing the balance of nature B) ancient people of having started wars and killed each other C) human beings of having used the earth's natural resources without thinking of the future D) the young of being ignorant of the earth's problems E) man of not having tried hard enough to prevent certain species from exterminating many others 2. The writer believes that A) the most damage to the earth has been done by human beings B) it is already too late to rescue the earth C) the earth's natural resources won't be sufficient for future generations D) the ecology of the earth can only be balanced by exterminating the alien species introduced deliberately E) cities, where people live on top of others, are the most disturbed environments 3. The writer points out that it is the youth A) who have done so much damage to the earth B) who exterminated some animal species C) who have always fought against the exploitation of the earth's natural resources D) who should find solutions to the earth's problems E) who disturbed the balance of nature 1. Learning the grammar of a foreign language is from speaking it fluently. 2 of other nationalities and their cultures very often leads to racism. 3. He his time at university, and as a result failed to pass his final exams. 4. All residents must get permission from the immigration office if they wish to work in the country. 5. I'm not exaggerating. This suitcase is too heavy to lift. ELS 321 The margin of victory was just 9,118 votes out of 1.63 million cast, prompting a recount which finally upheld the result. In 1986, Irish voters had rejected the divorce amendment by a 2-to-1 margin. According to political analysts, working-class residents of Dublin, the nation's capital, who accounted for one-third of Ireland's population, provided the crucial swing vote that determined the outcome. Analysts attributed the change in attitude since 1986 to several factors. Many cited as important the fact that the Irish government had passed 18 laws since the failed referendum covering property rights, child custody, child support and other issues related to divorce, because many people voting no in 1986 said that they did so because of inadequate laws covering the divisions of property in a divorce. Many analysts also pointed to the Irish government's $500,000 promotional campaign in favour of lifting the divorce ban as an important factor in the amendment's passage. Opponents of the amendment, including the influential Roman Catholic church, said that they would challenge the result in the courts, pointing to the fact that the government's expenditure of public funds to promote the amendment was ruled illegal by the Irish Supreme Court. The amendment would allow people to divorce only if they have lived separately for at least four of the previous five years. There were approximately 80,000 legally separated people in Ireland in 1995. With Ireland's vote, Malta became the only European country to have a ban on divorce. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as from the losing success by defeating an opponent give a vote provoke urge into action decide in favour of consist of (phrasal verb) result consequence mention by way of an example I) the legal right to keep and look after a child, especially given to the mother or father in the case of divorce m) cancel remove n) an official order forbidding something o) object formally to and try to overturn a ruling 332 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. The likely cause of the change in attitude in Ireland in favour of allowing divorce was, according to the passage, a result of A) a breakdown in family values over the previous nine years B) encouragement from the Irish Supreme Court C) the influential Catholic Church D) several new laws covering factors connected with divorce E) pressure from the European Union 2. The passage indicates that the victory was largely due to A) a promotional campaign by Roman Catholic Church B) the votes being incorrectly counted C) an increase in the number of legally separated persons in Ireland D) devout Roman Catholics refusing to vote on the issue E) workers living in Dublin and their families changing their opinion 3. The passage informs us that, in all the European countries but one A) it is legal for couples to get a divorce B) the Roman Catholic church has no influence C) the divorce rate is very high D) governments call for referendums on important issues E) there are adequate laws covering the divisions of property in a divorce 1. Since the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in the UK, the government has imposed a/an on all movements of livestock. 2. George W. Bush won the election in the state of Florida by such a/an margin that his opponent's supporters demanded a recount. 3. The participation in the elections was surprisingly low. Only forty percent of voters bothered to 4. their vote. The court awarded the parents joint of the children. Maria will look after them during the week and Owen will have them at the weekends. 5. The Body Shop is in this magazine as an example of a commercial organization which has combined marketing principles with environmental awareness. ELS 323 His fast-moving, suspenseful novels often feature an underdog lawyer who must skilfully battle powerful oppressors to save lives. Grisham began writing his first novel after observing a rape trial involving a 10-year-old victim. Stirred by the intense emotions in the courtroom, he wondered what a jury would do if the girl's father killed the attacker. Although he was already devoting more than 70 hours a week to his practice, Grisham got up early each day for three years to write what became A Time to Kill. Some two dozen publishers rejected the book before Wynwood Press bought the manuscript for 15,000 dollars and printed 5,000 copies in 1989. A New York movie scout saw the manuscript for Grisham's next novel before it was sold, and Paramount studios bought the rights to it for 600,000 dollars. This brought attention from many large book publishers, and Grisham quit his practice after signing a contract with the publisher Doubleday. The Firm (1991) spent almost a year on the New York Times best-seller list and was translated into more than 25 languages. Tom Cruise starred in the movie version, which was one of the top-grossing films of 1993. Grisham solidified his reputation as one of the most popular writers of the 1990s with The Pelican Brief (1992), The Client (1993), The Chamber (1994), The Rainmaker (1995), The Runaway Jury (1996), and The Partner (1997). The reissue of A Time to Kill also did well. The film rights to Grisham's novels now command millions of dollars. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as (phrase) b) the language of judges, lawyers and the law c) a novel, play or film in which excitement and emotional appeal are the essential elements, especially involving crime d) full of uncertainty e) (in a film) be about or include f) a person who is considered the poorest, weakest, the probable loser in a competition, etc. g) a cruel or unjust person or ruler h) examination in a law court i) person being killed, or suffering injury, pain, or loss, because of circumstances, a crime, etc. j) excite someone's emotions k) (for feelings) very strong or powerful extreme I) a strong feeling of any kind love, hate, fear, envy, etc. m) give up one's time, energy, etc. to something n) the business of a doctor, lawyer or accountant o) making high profits p) make or become strong or united q) desene *o get something 324 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, John Grisham was inspired to write his first novel after A) failing to make a living from his law practice B) becoming bored with studying law C) witnessing strong feelings generated during a trial D) being offered a sizeable amount of money from a film director E) graduating from drama school 2. The passage gives us the information that between 1991 and 1997, John Grisham A) published a new book every year B) worked both as a lawyer and a writer C) produced a number of films D) failed to earn much from writing E) translated books from different languages 3. From the passage it appears that John Grisham has a talent for A) explaining the language used in courtrooms in terms the general public can understand B) completing all his work in a few months C) producing movies about the drama of courtroom battles D) winning legal battles between authors and film directors over film rights E) rescuing people from oppressors and saving lives Upon seeing her son's killer, Louise couldn't control her and had to be held back by her friends. 2. He managed to win his case, despite being the in the dispute. After all, 3. He seems to have 4. He went along to see the spotting talent among all the hopeful new artists. for himself. He wanted to be present when the judge read out the punishment to the man who had broken into his shop. 5. The charity offers support to anyone who has been a/an of a violent crime. ELS 325 They may even accuse them of disloyalty, or make some spiteful remark about the friends' parents. Such a loss of dignity and descent into childish behaviour on the part of the adult deeply shocks the adolescents, and makes them resolve that in future they will not talk to their parents about the places or people they visit. Before very long the parents will be complaining that the child is secretive and never tells them anything, but they seldom realize that they have brought this on themselves. Disillusionment with the parents, however good and adequate they may be both as parents and as individuals, is to some degree inevitable. Most children have such a high ideal of their parents, unless the parents themselves have been unsatisfactory, that it can hardly hope to stand up to a realistic evaluation. Parents would be greatly surprised and deeply touched if they realized how much belief their children usually have in their character and infallibility, and how much this faith means to a child. If parents were prepared for this adolescent reaction, and realized that this was a sign that the child was growing up and developing valuable powers of observation and independent judgement, they would not be so hurt, and therefore would not drive the child into opposition by resenting and resisting it. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as remain unharmed after being exposed to something emotionally or physically damaging (phrase) g) be emotionally affected h) inability to do wrong or make mistakes i) force someone into a situation or place (phrase) 326 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. It is, to a certain extent, regardless of how satisfactory the parents are A) unavoidable that adolescents will lose their high estimation of their parents B) common that children resent their parents' behaviour C) disappointing for them to realize that their children are growing up D) usual for adolescents to want to shock and upset their parents E) normal for them to be compared unfavourably with friends' parents by their own children 2. Parents often fail to understand that A) it is natural for a child to prefer someone else's home to his or her own B) their children need some independence as they get older C) their own behaviour is often more childish than their children's D) it is impossible to be a perfect parent, no matter how hard they try E) they are themselves the cause of their child's tendency to keep things from them 3. Children generally believe strongly that their own parents A) are not as satisfactory as their friends' parents B) do not give them enough freedom C) cannot do anything wrong D) are opposed to everything they do E) are not capable of making judgements 1. When the teacher was ill, she very when her students brought her some flowers. 2. I don't think your son was playing when he hit mine. I think he was being 3. He was 4. Throughout the argument, despite being spoken to so offensively, she maintained her poverty when he lost his job in the economic crisis. and never once allowed herself to get angry. 5. Many people who voted for the government have an increasing sense of at their handling of the economy. ELS 327 k The Code of Hammurabi is the most complete remnant of Babylonian law. The background to the code is the body of Sumerian law under which city-states had lived for centuries. The code itself was advanced far beyond ancient tribal customs. The stela on which the code is inscribed originally stood in Babylon's temple of Marduk, the national god. It was discovered at the site of ancient Susa in 1901 by the French archaeologist Jean-Vincent Scheil, who presented it to the Louvre Museum. The code consists of 282 case laws, or judicial decisions, collected toward the end of Hammurabi's reign, decisions which deal with such matters as family, marriage and divorce tariffs trade and commerce prices and criminal and civil law. From the code it is evident that there were distinct social classes, each of which had its rights and obligations. The right of private property was recognized, though most of the land was in the hands of the royal house. Ownership of land brought with it the duty to provide men for the army and public works. Families were dominated by fathers. Marriages were arranged by parents, and control of the children by the father was unlimited until marriage. Adoption was common, either to ensure continuance of a family line or to perpetuate a business. In criminal law the ruling principle for punishment was the ancient lex talionis, or law of retaliation. Penalties were calculated according to the nature of the offense. Capital punishment was common, and the various means of execution were prescribed, depending on the nature of the crime. Neither imprisonment nor forced labour is mentioned in the code. Unintended manslaughter was punished by a fine. Wilful murder was not mentioned. Carelessness and neglect in the performance of work was severely punished. In general, the penalties prescribed were an improvement over the brutality of previous Assyrian law. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as collection of laws arranged in a system a small part of something that remains the main or largest part of something of a group united by blood ties through having a common ancestor write mark something with words a law based on previous decisions by judges (phrase) of judgement made by courts list of taxes on goods imported or exported different in kind separate something one is bound to do commitment the taking of someone (e.g. a child) into one's family as a legal relation stop from going out of use continue return of ill treatment that one has received punishment for wrongdoing or for failure to obey the rules crime sin breaking a rule punishment by death (phrase) accidental not deliberate not on purpose the killing of a person by another who hasn't actually intended to kill him deliberate on purpose 328 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. One of the things mentioned in the passage that the Code of Hammurabi tells us about Babylonian culture is that A) hanging was not used as a means of execution B) divorce was not permitted C) land was evenly distributed D) they had not moved beyond tribal customs E) there were separate ranks in society 2. According to the passage, Babylonians adopted other people's children into their families A) in order to make sure the family survived B) as a mark of respect for the national god Marduk C) after they had sent their own children to join the military D) if their own parents had died during military service for royalty E) if they did not have enough children to contribute to public works 3. From the information given about the Code of Hammurabi, we can conclude that A) the stela on which the code is inscribed is the best exhibit at the Louvre B) it is merely a list of taxes and import duties C) the description of different punishments for murder takes up the largest part in it D) modern European law is largely based on the applications stated in it E) imprisonment may not have been practised as a means of punishment in Babylonia Mrs. Higgins burnt Farmer Gile's barn down in for him shooting one of her dogs. 2. Massive stone ruins now known as the Great Zimbabwe are the of a structure built by one of the local dynasties in the 15th century. 3 is still legal in most American states, where prisoners can be put to death by lethal injection or electrocution. 4. In the 20th century, the machine has come to dominate furniture-making, with the small yet important exception of a few craftsmen in every country who have the handcraft tradition. 5. The for parking in the town centre is a £50.00 fine. ELS 329 When Clark and her husband decided to move to California, she looked for a way to keep her job with a public relations company that contracts with the federal government. To that end, she proposed a telecommuting schedule that had her at home in California for three weeks and on location in Washington for one week each month. Her company astounded her and said yes. It hadn't been done before, but now the company is looking into ways to encourage more people to try telecommuting. A home office loft was added to Clark's plans for the new house in Sacramento. Though open to the second floor of the house, the loft was designed to be self-contained and separate from the rest of the house. Extra phone lines were installed during construction. Her employer arranged for her to have remote access to the Local Area Network, processed through an autodial feature with a built-in calling card. Clark's office phone in Richland automatically bounced callers to her Sacramento address. A lot of callers didn't realize I wasn't on site, she says. Adapting to working at home was a learning experience, Clark admits. She found that it was important to minimize distractions. Everything needs to be in the work area, she says, so that you're not up and down, back and forth. She also came to realize that her work benefited if she followed a routine of getting ready for work as if she were going to a regular workplace. At first, it seems cool to roll out of bed in your pajamas and sit down to work still bleary-eyed - it's the shortest commute in history it's really a dream. But I learned that it was important to stick to a professional routine. In this manner, I find it easy to stay focused. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as when sleepy) n) remain with something and not to change to something else (phrasal verb) o) concentrated on one thing 330 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, Colleen Clark found it helpful when working at home to A) work in her pajamas B) work in different areas of the house C) use one telephone for both personal and business calls D) use an answering machine while out of the office E) keep to a businesslike routine 2. It is clear from the passage that Colleen Clark A) was the first person from her company to work from a home office B) was often distracted by something trivial when working at home C) found that her customers didn't like calling her at home D) found it too difficult to separate her home life from her work E) gave up commuting to Washington after three years 3. It is clear from the passage that Colleen Clark A) had a hard time trying to persuade her company to accept her suggestion B) was surprised by the company's approval of her suggestion of telecommuting C) wouldn't recommend telecommuting to other employees D) failed to convince her employers of the benefits of telecommuting E) found it very difficult to concentrate on her work at home 1. He had a well-paid job in Chicago, but he became tired of the and found a job in his hometown instead. 2. Sidney hates working in his crowded office, finding the constant conversations a/an 3. The film was made 4. The councillors wanted to get the ideas of the local people and in Africa, showing the beauty of the African landscape and wildlife. they held an open public meeting at the community centre. 5. Between 1639 and 1853, under the rule of the Tokugawa family, Japan was almost completely closed to all outside contact, and so became one of the few nations in world history. ELS 331 The village commemorates the period in Japan's history from 1603 to 1867, called the Tokugawa shogunate, when warlords called shoguns ruled the country. The warriors of the shoguns were called samurai. By the 12th century, the ability of the emperor and his court to govern effectively had diminished. It was then that the samurai emerged as a distinct social class. They were held together by personal loyalty to powerful chiefs the shoguns - who brought more territory under their control. Local wars among the chieftains continued for generations until finally, under the Tokugawa shogunate, the whole nation was united under one warlord. From the end of the 12th century until the Meiji Restoration, or resumption of the emperor's authority, in 1868, government was exclusively in the hands of the samurai class. The behaviour of the samurai was strictly regulated by a code of conduct called Bushido, which is translated as way of the warrior. The idea of the code developed in about the 13th century, and it encompassed the ideals of loyalty and self-sacrifice. By the 19th century, it had become the basis of ethical training for the whole of Japanese society, and it, contributed significantly to the tough Japanese nationalism and morale exhibited during World War II. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 332 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. We learn from the passage that the samurai came into existence as a separate class A) in April 1986 in Nikko B) following the Meiji Restoration C) after the end of the shogunate in 1867 D) when the village of Edo Mura was opened to the public E) after the emperor became unable to rule properly 2. It is clear from the passage that the Tokugawa shogunate A) had always been loyal to the Japanese Emperors B) was the most merciless of all in Japan C) had lost control of the country by the 12th century D) ruled over the whole of Japan for a long period E) display their customs to the general public today 3. Using the information in the passage, we could describe Bushido as A) a village constructed to remind the Japanese of their culture B) a fixed set of rules dictating how the samurai should behave C) the most powerful samurai chiefs D) local territorial wars between warlords E) the restoration of the emperor's rule 1. Easter, the greatest festival of the Christian church, which the resurrection of Jesus, is a movable feast - that is, it is not always held on the same date. 2. After the Soviets were forced out of Afghanistan the country broke up into different regions under their own 3. Animal rights organizations in the 19th century to promote humane treatment of work animals and pets. 4. The of trade between Germany and South Africa took place after the abolition of apartheid. 5. Greyhound racing used to be enjoyed by many working class people, but in recent years, this sport has in popularity. ELS 333 In the great academies of classical dance - the pre-eminent centres in the late 20th century are to be found in New York City's School of American Ballet and St. Petersburg's Kirov Ballet School - a wouldbe dancer begins to train at the age of 7 or 8. If the young dancer shows both physical and artistic promise, the next decade will be spent perfecting a program that is progressively more rigorous. Following a strict series of exercises that have been developed and refined over the last three centuries, the young dancer will be trained in a great tradition. The limbs will be strengthened, the torso will be molded into what ballet masters consider an ideal posture, and the dancer's experience will be enriched through the study of related subjects in humanities and the arts. Should the dancer show exceptional promise, he or she will be accepted into the corps de ballet of a company, where an apprenticeship of a different sort begins. First, to give the young performer experience, the dancer will fill, minor roles. While the glamour associated with these roles may be slight, they give the young performer a chance to gain assurance on stage and the opportunity to measure their skills against those of other young artists. Should the dancer continue to grow in stature, graduation from the corps de ballet may lead to becoming a soloist or a principal artist. Of the multitude of students who begin the study of dance, only a few of the most gifted will win the fame and fortune to which many aspire. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as 334 ELS Choose the correct answer according to the passage. 1. According to the passage, trainee ballet dancers A) are very likely to become rich and famous B) benefit from learning connected creative subjects C) do not train as rigorously as an athlete D) follow an exercise programme that hasn't changed for three hundred years E) usually begin to perform on stage at the age of seven or eight 2. It is clear from the passage that trainee ballet dancers A) all train at either New York City's School of American Ballet or St. Petersburg's Kirov Ballet School B) must be even stronger than athletes C) undergo an exercise regime which gets gradually more strenuous D) must be tall and muscular E) all start in the corps de ballet 3. The author informs us that trainee ballet dancers are given a series of minor roles A) whether they are talented or not B) which are very glamorous C) which will make them quite wealthy D) for skills assessment and confidence-building E) which aren't very strenuous Rachel applied for the job of assistant brand manager because she felt it would be useful experience for a product manager, a position to which she 2. One of the commonest causes of backache is the poor often adopted while sitting for long periods at work. 3. The forensic scientists examined the murder victim, who had bruises on his legs, arms, and 4. All around the world, thousands of men, women, and children have lost by stepping on explosive land mines left lying underground after local wars. 5. You really should send Jenny to piano lessons. If she can teach herself to play so well, she must be a naturally musician. ELS 335 However, the male domination of this game experienced a shock when three Hungarian sisters moved into the front line of world-class players. The feats of the Polgar sisters at early ages, in fact, matched or surpassed some of those of the greatest male players. In December 1991, at the age of 15, the youngest sister, Judit, achieved the rank of grandmaster against male competition, replacing Bobby Fischer as the youngest person in chess history to have won this honour. Although Susan was the eldest, she ranked as the number two woman player in the world behind Judit, who was acclaimed number one. The other sister, Sofia, lagged a bit behind she was only the world's sixth-ranked woman player, though, according to their father, Laszlo, Sofia was the most talented of the three. The chess-playing Polgar sisters, according to their father, achieved their uncommon abilities as the result of a carefully planned educational program. A psychologist, Polgar held a theory that geniuses are made, not born, and that early training and specialization were the key. He set out to prove his theory and determined that his children would focus on chess when Susan at the age of 4 expressed interest in the game. From that time Susan - and the others, when they came along - were immersed in a chess environment. Each of the girls began learning the game at 4, and eventually their daily training included five or more hours a day of playing time. Physical training was also included in the schedule for diversion and in order to build endurance for grueling matches. The sisters never attended school, having been tutored entirely at home by their parents. Through their mother, Klara, who taught several languages, and their international travels, the three learned English, Russian, Spanish, German, and even some Esperanto. Find words or phrases in the passage which mean the same as position or grade in an organization g) take the place of something or someone h) be